INTRODUCTION
1.  The application concerns an alleged lack of adequate medical treatment provided to the applicant when he was in detention, in breach of Article 3 of the Convention, and the alleged lack of justification for the applicant’s pretrial detention, in breach of Article 5 of the Convention. It also raises issues under Articles 18 and 34 of the Convention.
THE FACTS
2.  The applicant was born in 1955 and is serving a prison sentence in Baku. The applicant was represented by Mr J. Javadov, Mr E. Abbasov and Mr E. Aslanov, lawyers based in Baku.
3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
4.  The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
BACKGROUND
5.  The applicant is a former Prosecutor General (from March 1995 to April 2000), the former Ambassador of Azerbaijan to Romania (from March 2001 to March 2013), and the former Ambassador of Azerbaijan to Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina (until 17 August 2020).
6.  According to the applicant, prior to and around the time of the events of the present case, various local media sources published a number of articles concerning him, in which it was claimed, inter alia, that he had links to the political opposition and had political ambitions, and that accusations had been made that when he was an ambassador he had failed to take action about recently reported sales of arms by Serbia to Armenia which had come to light in or about July 2020.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE APPLICANT AND HIS PRE-TRIAL DETENTION
7.  In July 2020 the State Security Service (“the SSS”) established a special investigation team and initiated criminal proceedings in connection with suspected instances of embezzlement, abuse of official authority and bribery by officials of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Five senior officials of the Ministry were arrested and charged with the above-mentioned criminal offences. It appears that the preliminary investigation in that case also gave rise to suspicions against the applicant.
8.  On 9 August 2020 the applicant, who was then still the ambassador to Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina, arrived in Baku for an official visit to Azerbaijan by a Serbian government delegation.
9.  On 12 August 2020 the Sabail District Court authorised the SSS to conduct searches of residential premises and personal vehicles belonging to the applicant following a request by the SSS based on information received from the Ministry of Finance on suspected unlawful expenditure, overspending of State funds and a lack of financial accountability in the Azerbaijani Embassy in Serbia.
10.  On the morning of 13 August 2020 SSS officers arrived at the applicant’s flat in Baku and presented the search warrant. Following the search, the applicant was arrested on the same day and detained as a suspect. Subsequently, on 17 August 2020, he was dismissed from his position of the Ambassador.
11.  On 14 August 2020 the SSS formally charged the applicant with criminal offences under Article 308.2 (aggravated abuse of official authority) and Article 308-1.1 (using State funds otherwise than for their designated purpose) of the Criminal Code. In particular, the applicant, as the ambassador responsible for Embassy expenditure and the efficient use of public funds who was accountable to the relevant State authorities for the proper implementation of budgetary instructions, was accused of overspending public funds beyond the designated amounts by abusing his official powers in order to gain an illegal advantage for himself and third parties and deliberately using his official powers against the interests of the public service, including overspending on specified numbers of budget line items in successive years: six budget line items in 2015, six in 2016, four in 2017, six in 2018, nine in 2019, and two in the remaining period up to 3 July 2020. In total, the overspending had been calculated to amount to 180,802.05 euros (EUR) (equivalent to 318,229.20 Azerbaijani manats (AZN)) during the entire audit period, including EUR 102,728.88 (equivalent to AZN 180,802.82) of overspending during the period from 3 May 2016 (the date of entry into force of Article 308-1 of the Criminal Code) to 3 July 2020.
12.  On the same day, 14 August 2020, following a request lodged by the SSS investigator, the Sabail District Court ordered the applicant to be remanded in custody until 3 November 2020. During the hearing, the applicant and his lawyer argued, inter alia, that the accusations against him did not have any basis and were arbitrary, and asked the court to take into account the fact that he had never been convicted before, that he had children and grandchildren, that he suffered from serious health problems and had to adhere to a strict regime of prescription medications, and that he was planning to have surgery in September 2020. The court justified its decision as follows:
“The court, having had regard to the nature of the criminal offences with which [the applicant] has been charged ..., the valid and real possibility that [his release] could evoke negative emotions in society and that [if released] he would illegally influence persons who have worked as his subordinates for a long period of time, considers that the preventive measure of remand in custody should be applied in respect [of the applicant]...”.
13.  The applicant appealed. In his written grounds for appeal and oral submissions at the appellate hearing, he and his lawyer argued that the material in the case file did not give rise to a “reasonable suspicion” that he had committed a criminal offence, that the gravity of the alleged offences could not be a main factor in ordering pre-trial detention, that the firstinstance court had not given relevant or sufficient reasons for ordering his detention, and that it had not taken into account such factors as the applicant’s advanced age, his poor health, his long-term public service in high-ranking positions, the awards he had received for his service, his numerous publications in the legal field, and so on. During the appellate hearing, the applicant also asked the court to substitute the remand in custody with the preventive measure of house arrest.
14.  In their submissions to the appellate court, the prosecuting authorities noted that they had received “operative information” that on 13 August 2020 an employee of the Embassy in Serbia (unnamed in the court decision) who had a close personal relationship with the applicant had made a phone call to the Embassy driver and instructed him to go immediately and take certain items, including documents, from the applicant’s residence and hide them at another address. The prosecuting authorities submitted that they were taking steps to have that unnamed employee brought to Azerbaijan. In view of the above, they asked the appellate court to uphold the detention order to prevent the risk of the applicant obstructing the investigation.
15.  On 20 August 2020 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the first-instance court’s detention order. It noted that the “reasonable suspicion” against the applicant had been confirmed by the preliminary evidence in the case file, including evidence concerning the overspending of public funds as well as a statement of the Embassy’s financial attaché (named in the court decision) indicating that the excess spending on the budget line items referred to in the financial audit had been executed on the direct instructions of the Ambassador. As to the risk that the applicant could illegally influence his ex-subordinates, the court noted that the prosecuting authorities had clearly explained that that possibility was the reason for seeking the applicant’s remand in custody and that they had supported their submissions by the evidence included in the case file. This preliminary evidence was presented to the other party and to the courts in compliance with the requirements of confidentiality. While the court agreed with the defence’s submissions that the gravity of the criminal charges did not in itself constitute a key factor in choosing a pre-trial preventive measure, it observed that the choice of the preventive measure of remand in custody had been based on the risk that the applicant would obstruct the investigation. As to the applicant’s arguments concerning his health, the court noted that no documents had been presented to it showing that he had been under constant medical supervision. As to the noncustodial preventive measures such as house arrest, the court held that “in the current situation” choosing such measures was not appropriate and that there was a need to isolate the accused from society in the initial stages of the investigation. The court observed that, nevertheless, in the event that grounds established by law for a non-custodial preventive measure were to arise, the defence would have a right to apply to the first-instance court in that regard. The court concluded that it agreed with the first-instance court’s conclusion that there was a valid and real possibility that the applicant would obstruct the investigation by illegally influencing participants in the proceedings.
16.  On 21 August 2020 the criminal case against the applicant was transferred to the Prosecutor General’s Office.
17.  On 7 September 2020 the applicant applied to the Nasimi District Court asking to be released on bail, reiterating his previous arguments and asserting, in particular, that he was suffering from a number of serious health conditions. On 12 September 2020 the Nasimi District Court rejected the applicant’s request, holding that a number of further investigative steps were still to be carried out and that there was a risk that the applicant, if released, would obstruct the investigation by using his broad personal connections to illegally influence relevant persons both within the country and abroad in order to suppress evidence, information and documents necessary for establishing the objective truth.
18.  The applicant appealed, relying largely on the same arguments, and complaining that the first-instance court’s finding that there was a risk that he would obstruct the investigation was not supported by or based on any specified factual circumstances suggesting there was such a risk. On 22 September 2020 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, reiterating the first-instance court’s reasoning.
19.  In the meantime, on 18 September 2020 the Prosecutor General’s Office, in addition to the charges under Articles 308.2 and 308-1.1 of the Criminal Code, charged the applicant with criminal offences under Article 193-1.3.2 (laundering of money or other assets, in large amounts), Article 313 (forgery by an official), Article 178.3.2 as in force before 1 December 2017 (fraud causing large-scale loss) and Article 179.3.2 (embezzlement or squandering in large amounts) of the Criminal Code. In particular, the applicant was accused of the following:
(a)  in December 2012, while he was still Ambassador to Romania and had also recently been appointed Ambassador to Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina with an official residence then in Bucharest, during the process of purchasing a building in Sarajevo for the Azerbaijani Embassy’s office in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he had deliberately overstated the purchase price and related expenses to a commission sent by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for that purpose. He had interfered in a visit to the property by the members of the commission, obstructed their attempts to meet the seller of the property in person, and had deceived the members of the commission by indicating that a total amount of EUR 4,905,000 needed to be allocated from public funds for the purpose whereas he had already privately agreed a purchase price of EUR 1,800,000 with the seller. Following the transfer of EUR 4,905,000 to the bank account of the Embassy in Romania, in 2013 he concluded a purchase agreement with the seller for an overstated purchase price, while actually paying EUR 1,800,000 for the property. The difference of EUR 3,105,000 was subsequently transferred in parts, using documents forged by the applicant as false justifications for the transfers and with the aid of accomplices including B.A. (a relative of the applicant’s personal driver) and others whose identities were still being investigated, to various bank accounts in Türkiye, Romania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, some of which belonged to various private companies registered offshore, as well as in Romania and in Türkiye, but which belonged de facto to the applicant. Thereafter, EUR 2,700,000 of this money was laundered in Türkiye by various means with the aid of the applicant’s accomplices;
(b)  after his appointment in 2013 as the Ambassador to Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina, his official residence being in Belgrade, in 2018 the applicant overstated the costs of urgent repairs to the fence around the courtyard of the Embassy in Serbia and embezzled public funds in the amount of EUR 36,800 with the aid of accomplices and by way of forged official documents;
(c)  in 2019, with the aid of accomplices and by way of forged official documents, he overstated the costs of installation of new security cameras for a monument erected in Belgrade at the expense of the Azerbaijani government and embezzled public funds in the amount of EUR 102,100; and
(d)  he committed unlawful overspending of public funds on multiple occasions, which was the basis for the initial criminal charges summarised in paragraph 11 above.
20.  B.A., who was identified as one of the applicant’s accomplices, was also charged with criminal offences under Articles 178.3.2 and 1931.3.2 of the Criminal Code and a warrant was issued for his arrest.
21.  On 23 October 2020, at the request of the prosecuting authority, the Nasimi District Court extended the period of the applicant’s pre-trial detention by three months to 3 February 2021. During the hearing, the applicant’s lawyers had reiterated their previous arguments in favour of the applicant’s release. Without expressly addressing their arguments, the court justified its decision by observing that the investigation period had been extended because there was a need to carry out various investigative and procedural steps; it also found that the grounds for the applicant’s detention “had not ceased to exist”.
22.  The applicant appealed, reiterating his previous arguments and complaining that the first-instance court’s extension order was not based on any specific factual grounds justifying the applicant’s continued detention. On 2 November 2020 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal, finding that “the first-instance court [had] correctly concluded [that the period of pre-trial detention should be extended] given the possibility of [the applicant] absconding or obstructing the investigation by illegally influencing the participants in the criminal proceedings”.
23.  On 29 January 2021, at the request by the prosecuting authority, the Nasimi District Court further extended the period of the applicant’s pre-trial detention by another three months, to 3 May 2021. Without expressly addressing the defence’s arguments, which were essentially similar to those raised in previous hearings, the court justified its decision by providing essentially the same brief reasoning as in its previous extension order (see paragraph 21 above), observing in particular that there was a need to carry out various investigative and procedural steps and finding that the grounds for the applicant’s detention “had not ceased to exist”. The applicant appealed, essentially reiterating his previous arguments. On 4 February 2021 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal, providing the same reasoning as in its earlier decision of 2 November 2020 concerning the preceding extension order (see paragraph 22 above).
24.  On 30 April 2021 the Binagadi District Court further extended the period of the applicant’s pre-trial detention by another three months, to 3 August 2021. While the applicant essentially reiterated his previous submissions, the court held that there was a need to carry out various investigative and procedural steps, that a large amount of investigation material had been collected, and that there was a possibility that the applicant would abscond or would obstruct the investigation by illegally influencing the participants in the criminal proceedings. On 8 May 2021 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed an appeal by the applicant, finding summarily that the arguments raised in the appeal (which were essentially similar to the applicant’s previous arguments) were not a basis for quashing the decision of the first-instance court and that that decision had been lawful.
25.  On 17 May 2021 the prosecuting authority reclassified the charges against the applicant as falling under Articles 179.3.2, 193-1.3.2, 308.2, 3081.1 and 313 of the Criminal Code, dropping the charge under Article 178.3.2 of the Criminal Code.
26.  On 25 June 2021 the applicant applied to the Binagadi District Court asking for the substitution of his pre-trial detention with house arrest. He asked the court to take into account his poor health, his need for specialised medical treatment, his age, and the fact that the investigation was nearing completion. He also argued that his arrest and continued detention were motivated by ulterior purposes, namely by the alleged hostile and vengeful attitude towards him of A., a high-ranking official of the Presidential Administration responsible for working with the law-enforcement authorities. He alleged that A. had harboured that attitude since a relative of his had been detained and convicted when the applicant was Prosecutor General. He further argued that a biased attitude towards him was also held by the Government Agent before the Court, who had previously been A.’s subordinate at work.
27.  On 5 July 2021 the Binagadi District Court dismissed the applicant’s request. It noted that the applicant had been transferred to the Hospital of the Military Medical Department (“the MMD”) of the SSS for inpatient medical examinations and treatment (see paragraph 59 below) and that he had failed to support his request for house arrest with any relevant or substantive arguments. On 16 July 2021 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld this decision observing, inter alia, that the grounds for ordering the applicant’s pretrial detention “had not ceased to exist”.
28.  On 23 July 2021 the Binagadi District Court further extended the applicant’s pre-trial detention until 13 September 2021. On 30 July 2021 the Baku Court of Appeal upheld that decision. The parties’ submissions and the reasoning provided by the courts were essentially the same as in the proceedings concerning the previous extension (see paragraph 24 above).
29.  The criminal case was sent for trial. The hearing began in September 2021, and by a judgment of the Baku Court of Serious Crimes of 21 January 2022 the applicant was convicted as charged and sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment. The conviction was subsequently upheld by the Baku Court of Appeal.
THE APPLICANT’S HEALTH AND MEDICAL TREATMENT
The applicant’s health before and after his arrest and the medical care given
30.  The applicant submitted that prior to his arrest he had been diagnosed with and suffered from various chronic conditions and illnesses, including multiple spinal disc herniations and protrusions, spinal cord compressions, osteochondrosis, various heart and cardiovascular conditions, hypercholesterolemia, a colon problem (polyps), hyperuricemia, type 2 diabetes, immunodeficiency, Vitamin D deficiency, and so on. He had been examined twice a year and treated by a Swiss cardiologist. He noted that he had undergone seven (unspecified) surgeries in the six years preceding his arrest, and at the time of his arrest and during his pre-trial detention he was taking up to twenty different medications daily.
31.  Following his arrest in August 2020, the applicant was detained on remand in the SSS detention facility. From the documents submitted by the Government, it appears that on 14 August 2020, following the applicant’s arrest, the detention facility started keeping separate medical records (a “medical record book”) about him. For the period between that date and 30 September 2020, the record book contains around twenty handwritten entries made at intervals of one to four days. From the signatures, it appears that most of the entries were made by the same doctor. The first entry was relatively lengthy and, in so far as it was legible, contained results of an ultrasound examination which did not reveal anything of concern. The remaining entries were brief and essentially recorded the applicant’s complaints. The applicant appeared to often complain about back pain, decreased mobility in his right leg, insomnia, general weakness, dizziness, diarrhoea and constipation, chest pain and palpitations, shortness of breath, anxiety, and so on. It was noted that he had refused to undergo a colonoscopy, an electrocardiogram (“ECG”), and an examination by a neurosurgeon, with some of those entries specifying that the reason was his lack of trust in doctors whom he did not know. Several entries indicated that he was continuing to take his own medications which had been prescribed to him before his arrest, and one entry listed thirteen such medications that he was taking on a daily basis. A couple of entries indicated that he had been offered a few medications, apparently (in so far as they were legible) for musculoskeletal and gastric pain and breathing problems, some of which he refused. On 23 September 2020 blood tests showed that his HB (haemoglobin), HCT (haematocrit) and sugar levels were within the appropriate norms. On 30 September 2020 the applicant underwent an ECG test, the results of which were recorded in a handwritten note in the medical record book which is not fully legible.
32.  The medical record book available in the case file, submitted by the Government, contained no entries between 30 September 2020 and 12 March 2021, when the applicant was seen by a therapist, who observed that the applicant’s overall health, blood pressure and pulse were satisfactory and that he had been given a Covid-19 vaccination. The following entry was by a neurologist and dated 30 March 2021, consisting of just a few handwritten words, of which only “neuropathy” was legible.
33.  Separate medical reports dated 16, 19 and 28 October 2020 indicated that the applicant had been examined by three specialists. An examination by a cardiologist on 16 October 2020, apparently conducted both in person and also with reference to medical records and information provided by the applicant, resulted in diagnoses of, inter alia, progressive angina pectoris, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, hyperuricemia, Vitamin D deficiency, and sciatica in connection with vertebral pathology. It was observed that he had a left ventricular hypertrophy and that his left ventricular function was at 52%. The cardiologist recommended, inter alia, inpatient treatment, in isolation because he was in a high-risk group for Covid-19. Moreover, as the medications that the applicant was taking were not fully adequate given the deterioration of his health, the cardiologist recommended joint comprehensive examination and treatment by a group of specialists including a cardiologist, an endocrinologist, a neuropathologist and a gastroenterologist.
34.  An examination by a gastroenterologist on 19 October 2020 resulted in, inter alia, a recommendation that the applicant undergo a colonoscopy. It was observed that he had had gastrointestinal problems for around eight years and was complaining of widespread pain in the abdominal area, bloating, nausea, constipation, blood in the stool, occasional vomiting, and so on. He had had surgery for the removal of polyps several years before, but had not had a colonoscopy in four years. A neurosurgeon who examined him on 28 October 2020 observed that the applicant had osteochondrosis, several cervical and lumbar disc herniations and protrusions, and narrowing of the spinal canal. He recommended conservative drug treatment and physiotherapy for cervical herniations, a laminectomy and transpedicular fixation surgery for the L4-L5 disc, and the removal of herniations in the lumbar area.
35.  On 26 October 2020 the applicant had cervical and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (“MRI”) scans at the MMD Hospital. The scan revealed multiple pathological conditions, including several herniated discs, narrowing of the spinal canal and compression of the spinal cord, narrowing of neural foramina, compression of nerve roots, cervical osteochondroma, and so on.
36.  On 9 December 2020 the applicant’s lawyer referred to the abovementioned medical reports and asked the prosecuting authorities to lift the preventive measure of remand in custody imposed on the applicant and to order a forensic medical examination. On 11 December 2020 the prosecuting authorities partly granted the request and ordered a forensic medical examination.
37.  On 27 December 2020 the applicant had an ECG test at the MMD, which revealed sinus tachycardia. On 28 December 2020 the applicant underwent thyroid and lung examinations, which do not appear to have revealed any serious conditions or pathologies in those organs. A 7mm fibrous nodule was detected in the subpleural area of the lower right lung. On the same day, biochemical and blood tests were carried out, which showed that most factors were within the normal ranges, except for slightly raised haemoglobin and blood glucose levels, high VLDL cholesterol, and a slightly raised prothrombin time (measured in seconds).
38.  Following the prosecuting authorities’ decision of 11 December 2020 (see paragraph 36 above), on 14 January 2021 a forensic report on the applicant’s health was issued by a committee of experts who had seen him on 11 January 2021. According to the applicant, this examination was carried out for a “formalistic purpose” and “from a distance, without even a physical examination”, by “incompetent” persons who merely briefly questioned him, with the result that it contained “incorrect and inconsistent” diagnoses.
39.  The forensic report of 14 January 2021, issued by the abovementioned expert committee of six physicians and forensic experts, stated that the forensic examination had been carried out between 15 December 2020 and 14 January 2021. The questions put to the committee by the prosecuting authorities mainly related to their assessment of the seriousness of the health problems, whether those problems were compatible with detention, and whether they required specialised treatment or could be treated at the detention facility or a prison medical facility. It appears that the examination had mainly been based on the applicant’s medical records, although the experts had seen the applicant in person on 11 January 2021. The report summarised the applicant’s medical history before and after his arrest, and repeated the diagnoses made following the earlier examinations (see paragraphs 33-35 and 37 above). The committee concluded that the applicant’s current state of health was not incompatible with detention, did not preclude his participation in the investigation and did not require any emergency surgery or other urgent specialised medical interventions. On the basis of observations of the dynamics of his illnesses, it also concluded that “an adequate course of treatment could be found”, and that, if necessary, any medical treatment could be provided either at the place of his pre-trial detention or at the Medical Facility of the Prison Service of the Ministry of Justice.
40.  On 23 February 2021 the applicant’s lawyer asked the Prosecutor General’s Office to approve the examination of the applicant by three private doctors of his own choice at his own expense. The lawyer asserted that the applicant’s health was deteriorating.
41.  On 26 February 2021 the Investigation Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office decided to postpone consideration of the request “until the circumstances relevant for deciding on the request”. It observed that on 11 January 2021 the applicant had been examined by a committee of medical experts which had issued a forensic report on 14 January 2021. It further observed that less than two months had passed since that examination and that therefore a request had been sent to the SSS detention facility enquiring whether there had been a material change in the applicant’s health condition since then.
42.  It appears that on 18 March 2021 the applicant’s lawyer re-sent the request which had been made on 23 February 2021. In response, on 30 March 2021 the Prosecutor General’s Office sent the lawyer a copy of its decision of 26 February 2021, without any information as to whether there had been any further decisions.
43.  In April 2021 the applicant appealed against the postponement decision of 26 February 2021 (see paragraph 41 above) under the judicial supervision procedure set out in Article 449 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), arguing that it was unlawful because the procedural rules did not allow for the postponement of a decision on an urgent request and that it was in breach of the applicant’s rights under Article 3 of the Convention. By decisions of 21 and 27 April 2021 the Binagadi District Court and the Baku Court of Appeal rejected the appeal as inadmissible, finding that the type of decision challenged by the applicant was not among those which could be challenged under the judicial supervision procedure, which were exhaustively listed in Article 449.3 of the CCrP.
44.  The case material does not include any documents relating to medical examinations or any medical records from between mid-January to early April 2021 (except two brief handwritten entries in the medical record book, referred to in paragraph 32 above). The applicant submitted that during this period he had been treating himself with the medication prescribed before his arrest. That medication had been given to the detention facility staff by his relatives and then given to the applicant by the medical staff of the detention facility without any supervision, intervention or medical advice. From February 2021 his health had started to deteriorate, and after the end of March 2021 it started to worsen significantly day by day. He met his lawyer four or five times in April 2021 and complained to the lawyer on each occasion that he had stomach and back pains; had to use a cane to walk; that he had often lost his balance while standing or walking and by that time had fallen on the floor over seventy times, falling several times a day because of pain (sciatica) and cramps in his legs; and that he had intestinal obstructions.
45.  On 2 and 3 April 2021 the MMD Hospital carried out biochemical and general blood tests on the applicant, the results of which mostly appeared to be within the normal range, with slight deviations in MCV (mean corpuscular volume), MCH (mean corpuscular haemoglobin), thrombocytes, fibrinogens, and prothrombin time (measured as a percentage).
46.  On 7 April 2021 an investigator from the Investigation Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office considered the applicant’s lawyer’s request of 23 February 2021 (see paragraphs 40 and 42 above) and dismissed it, finding (based on a submission received in the meantime from the SSS concerning the MMD Hospital) that the MMD Hospital was appropriately equipped to examine and treat the applicant and was staffed with the specialised and experienced physicians needed in the applicant’s case.
47.  On 28 April 2021, after the applicant’s request under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court (see paragraphs 48-49 below), additional medical examinations were carried out by the MMD Hospital, including consultations by (a) a neurosurgeon, who diagnosed the applicant with osteochondrosis of the neck and spine, several spinal disc herniations, spinal stenosis, chronic pain syndrome and diabetic neuropathy, and recommended conservative treatment and prescribed two medications; (b) cardiologists, who diagnosed him with coronary heart disease and angina pectoris and prescribed three medications; (c) a gastroenterologist, who observed that the applicant had had a polypectomy two years before and that as recently as two weeks previously had had blood in his stool, and recommended a colonoscopy and a computed tomography (“CT”) scan of the gastrointestinal tract; it was noted that the applicant had stated that he would decide whether to follow this recommendation after “consulting his personal doctor”. ECG, ultrasound and cardiac ultrasound examinations and blood tests were also performed.
The Court proceedings and the applicant’s subsequent medical treatment
First decision on interim measures
48.  On 19 April 2021 the applicant requested the Court to indicate to the Government under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court that he should be placed in a specialised private clinic for medical treatment, including surgery, and given access to the specialists of his own choice named in his domestic request of 23 February 2021 (see paragraph 40 above).
49.  On 20 April 2021 the Court (the duty judge) adjourned the decision under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court pending receipt of information from the respondent Government. The Government were requested under Rule 54 § 2 (a) of the Rules of Court to provide detailed information about the applicant’s state of health and any medical treatment provided to him during his detention. In reply, the Government submitted the information requested, supported by medical records as summarised above. The applicant was given an opportunity to comment on the Government’s submissions; these comments, where relevant, are also included in the above summary.
50.  Having considered the parties’ submissions, on 7 May 2021 the Court (the duty judge) made the following indication to the Government:
“- that, at the earliest possible date, the applicant be transferred on an inpatient basis to the Military Hospital of the Military Medical Department of the State Security Service, or the Medical Institution of the Penal Service of the Ministry of Justice, or a similar specialised medical facility within the penal system, for a new comprehensive assessment by the facility’s specialist doctors of his current health condition, determination of any need for inpatient treatment and/or supervised outpatient treatment, assessment of necessity of any urgent interventions (such as spinal fixation surgery, colonoscopy or other interventions relevant to the conditions the applicant is suffering from) and, in the event of such necessity, carrying out such urgent interventions;
- the Government are requested to inform the Court, by 11 June 2021 at the latest, of the measures taken as indicated above and of any treatment provided, and to submit a plan of any future inpatient and/or outpatient treatment.”
51.  By a letter of 11 May 2021, sent to the Court on 12 May, the Government expressed their “deep concern” about the Court’s abovementioned decision, saying that it had been “apparently taken solely on the basis of the applicant’s submissions”. Arguing that the parties’ submissions up to that date had not suggested that the applicant suffered from any urgent or life-threatening conditions, the Government asked the Court to lift the interim measures indicated on 7 May 2021. On 17 May 2021 the Court (the duty judge) refused the Government’s request and notified the parties that the interim measure indicated on 7 May 2021 continued to apply.
52.  On 18 May 2021 the applicant informed the Court that the Government were refusing to place him on an inpatient basis to a penal medical facility. The letter was forwarded to the Government for information.
53.  By a letter dated 25 May but sent to the Court on 26 May 2021 the applicant informed the Court that he had still not been transferred to a prison medical facility and was not receiving any outpatient treatment, medical examinations or interventions, and that his health was deteriorating. Enclosed with this letter was, inter alia, a copy of a letter of 22 May 2021 sent by the prosecuting authorities to the Head of the SSS detention facility asking them to comply with the Court’s decision of 7 May 2021 by ensuring that the applicant was examined again, within a short period of time, by the medical staff of the MMD Hospital and sending the results of the examination to the prosecuting authorities. Enclosed with the letter was also a copy of the applicant’s own typewritten letter dated 22 May 2021 to the SSS detention facility in which he referred to the prosecuting authorities’ abovementioned letter of 22 May 2021 and argued that in that letter the prosecuting authorities were actually asking for an outpatient examination rather than a transfer to a hospital on an inpatient basis. He emphasised that the Court had indicated that he should be transferred to a hospital as an inpatient and stated that he had refused to undergo any short-term outpatient medical examination. In a handwritten note on that typewritten letter, the applicant also accused A. and the Government Agent (see paragraph 26 above) of “non-compliance” with the interim measures. The applicant’s letter, together with the enclosures, was forwarded to the Government for information.
54.  On 11 June 2021, the deadline indicated by the Court (see paragraph 50 above), the Government informed the Court that following the Court’s decision of 7 May 2021 the medical staff of the MMD Hospital and the SSS pre-trial detention facility had offered to transfer the applicant to the MMD Hospital as an inpatient for him to undergo a comprehensive medical examination. However, “the applicant [had] refused to be transferred to the hospital without providing any plausible reasons”. In this connection, the Government referred to the applicant’s above-mentioned letter of 22 May 2021. The Government also submitted a copy of a statement dated 24 May 2021 and signed by the staff of the SSS detention facility and the MMD (though not signed by the applicant), which indicated that on 24 May 2021 they had “again” offered to transfer the applicant to the MMD Hospital as an inpatient but he had refused to be transferred, claiming that the prosecuting authorities’ letter of 22 May 2021 (mentioned in paragraph 53 above) “had not fully reflected the European Court’s decision [of 7 May 2021]”.
55.  The Government’s letter, together with its enclosure, was forwarded to the applicant for comment. By a letter of 18 June 2021, the applicant submitted that he had never refused to be transferred to the MMD Hospital, but that he had merely refused any outpatient examination, which was what he understood the prosecuting authorities had been seeking from the SSS medical staff, whereas the Court’s interim measure had clearly indicated that he should be transferred to a hospital for inpatient examination and treatment. He also submitted that his health had been worsening and that by that time he had lost his balance and fallen over in the detention facility over a hundred times since his arrest, and he asked the Court to indicate to the Government, under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, that he should be placed in a specialised private clinic of his choice.
Second decision on interim measures
56.  Following the above developments, on 22 June 2021 the Court (the duty judge) made the following indication to the respondent Government under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court:
“- to ensure the applicant’s immediate transfer on an inpatient basis to the Military Hospital of the Military Medical Department of the State Security Service or a similar facility for a new comprehensive assessment by the facility’s specialist doctors of his current health condition, determination of any need for any ongoing inpatient treatment and/or supervised outpatient treatment and assessment of necessity of any urgent interventions relevant to the conditions the applicant is suffering from, and, in the event of such necessity, carrying out such urgent interventions;
- to inform the Court, by 19 July 2021 at the latest, of the measures taken as indicated above and of any treatment provided, and to submit a plan of any future inpatient and/or outpatient treatment deemed necessary.”
57.  In the same decision the Court indicated the following to the applicant:
“- to duly submit to steps taken by the relevant authorities and medical personnel with a view to implementation of the above-mentioned measures indicated by the Court.”
58.  On 1 July 2021 the applicant informed the Court that he had still not been transferred to a prison medical facility. The letter was forwarded to the Government for information.
59.  On 5 July 2021 the applicant informed the Court that on 2 July 2021 he had been transferred to the MMD Hospital.
60.  On 16 July 2021 the Government confirmed that the applicant had been transferred to the MMD Hospital on 2 July 2021 and submitted information on the medical care provided to the applicant since then. The Government’s submissions of 16 July were followed by further submissions and documents sent on 20 August 2021.
61.  In particular, the Government submitted that, following the transfer of the applicant to hospital, complex physical, laboratory and instrumental examinations had been carried out. The applicant was first examined by a gastroenterologist and an oesophagogastroduodenoscopy and total colonoscopy were performed under intravenous sedation. The applicant underwent a colonoscopic polypectomy and polyps were removed and sent for pathohistological examination. Appropriate further conservative treatment was prescribed. On 7 July 2021 the applicant was examined by an ophthalmologist and several eye treatment procedures were carried out.
62.  On 8 July 2021 the applicant was examined by a neurologist and was diagnosed with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (“BPPV”), left-sided discogenic cervical radiculopathy and discogenic lumbar radiculopathy. Recommendations and medication were prescribed.
63.  On the same day, 8 July 2021, the applicant underwent a complete abdominal ultrasound, a doppler ultrasonography of the bilateral carotid and vertebral arteries, and a CT scan of the abdomen and chest. On 13 July MRI and MRA (magnetic resonance angiography) tests were carried out. On 14 July the applicant was examined by an otorhinolaryngologist. No significant pathological changes were discovered as a result of those examinations and tests.
64.  In support of their submissions (see paragraphs 61-63 above), the Government provided a statement of the MMD dated 9 July 2021, and a large number of medical documents, including numerous test results.
65.  The applicant was hospitalised until 22 July 2021, when he was transferred back to the SSS detention facility. According to the Government, as of 22 July 2021 the applicant’s general condition was satisfactory, and his respiratory system, blood pressure and pulse were normal.
66.  On 2 August 2021 the applicant was again transferred to the MMD Hospital after he reported increased dizziness and continued to complain of back and neck pain and having falls. More tests of various kinds were carried out. On 10 August 2021 the main cause for dizziness and loss of balance was recorded as BPPV, with which the applicant had been diagnosed earlier. This condition, however, carried minimum risk to life. During the second hospitalisation, the applicant was treated conservatively by several types of medication. On 17 August 2021 the applicant was transferred back to the SSS detention facility.
67.  In his comments to the Government’s submissions, the applicant said, inter alia, that by 2 August 2021 the total number of falls he had had in detention had exceeded 170 and that he had also had falls in the hospital. He also noted, with reference to a statement obtained from a private doctor, that it was recommended that patients with BPPV (usually elderly people) should be under constant supervision, have walks in the open air and lead an active lifestyle as preventive measures. The applicant claimed that after his “sudden” and “unexplained” transfer back to the SSS detention facility on 17 August he had not been receiving adequate medical treatment in the detention facility.
68.  On 23 August 2021 the applicant asked to be examined by a private neurologist. This was allowed by the detention facility officials and he was examined on 2 September 2021. It appears from an opinion drawn up and signed by the neurologist following the examination that he first examined the applicant’s medical records and then heard the applicant’s complaints and examined him physically, without conducting any specialised tests. The neurologist diagnosed the applicant with second-stage dyscirculatory encephalopathy caused by cerebral atherosclerosis, rightsided pyramidal insufficiency and vestibulo-atactic syndrome, and diabetic polyneuropathy. He noted that the patient was at risk of a transient ischaemic attack and that there was a serious risk of ischaemic optic neuropathy. He recommended immediate hospitalisation in a specialist neurosurgical hospital and a number of tests, including electromyography and electroneuromyography, doppler ultrasonography, pure sound audiometry, and so on.
69.  The applicant’s trial began on 3 September 2021 with a preliminary hearing in the Baku Court of Serious Crimes. According to the applicant, during two of the subsequent hearings, on 13 and 17 September 2021, he had fainted and the hearings were stopped. On 13 September an ambulance was called, but it took a long time to arrive because the emergency services were overloaded because of the pandemic, and the applicant was sent back to the detention facility to receive medical assistance there. On 17 September again an ambulance was called. This time it arrived promptly and an emergency doctor provided care to the applicant in the courtroom for about an hour. Having also taken into account the applicant’s medical history and previous diagnoses, the emergency doctor diagnosed the applicant with a transient ischaemic attack, arterial hypertension, heart arrhythmia in the form of tachycardia, and dyscirculatory encephalopathy, and recommended hospitalisation (inpatient, with bed rest) and intensive dynamic observation of the patient. It appears that, nevertheless, the applicant was taken back to the SSS detention facility and continued to be brought to the court hearings twice a week.
70.  According to the applicant, the authorities were informed and aware of the above-mentioned opinions of the neurologist of 2 September 2021 (see paragraph 68 above) and of the emergency doctor of 17 September 2021 (see paragraph 69 above). However, according to the Government, the applicant did not inform the SSS detention facility or the MMD about those opinions and did not send them copies of those documents, and the Government became aware of those opinions only after they were forwarded to them by the Court, following which the Government Agent’s Office forwarded them to the MMD. According to the undated information provided by the MMD and submitted subsequently by the Government to the Court on 26 October 2021, the diagnoses in the neurosurgeon’s opinion of 2 September 2021 were not confirmed, except that of diabetic polyneuropathy, which had indeed been detected during the applicant’s hospitalisation in the MMD Hospital and it was not necessary or expedient to carry out the tests recommended by the neurologist. As to the diagnoses made by the emergency doctor on 17 September 2021 (in particular that of a transient ischaemic attack), they were also not confirmed, as such diagnoses could not have been adequately made by an emergency doctor without a complex medical examination. Moreover, the applicant had been examined by the SSS detention facility and MMD doctors immediately after each of the twelve court hearings held before that point (11 October 2021), including the hearing of 17 September 2021.
71.  According to the applicant, on 15 October 2021 his health deteriorated sharply and he was again transferred from the detention facility to the MMD Hospital. According to the Government, he was transferred to the MMD Hospital pursuant to a decision by the MMD to convene a committee of six doctors from the MMD Hospital and other hospitals for another comprehensive examination of the applicant, following the developments described in paragraph 70 above. Before the physical examination by the doctors on 16 October 2021, the applicant underwent a number of tests, including blood and urine tests, ECG, MRI, electroencephalography, doppler ultrasonography, and so on. It appears from the medical report of that committee that they confirmed only the diagnoses made previously at the MMD Hospital (including BPPV) and recommended certain adjustments to the applicant’s prescriptions. On 17 October 2021 the applicant was transferred back to the SSS detention facility.
72.  It appears that throughout the applicant’s participation at subsequent hearings, an ambulance crew from the General Medical Department (“the GMD”) of the SSS ensured any medical assistance he needed. According to the applicant, during a hearing on 25 October 2021, he fainted again. He was put on a stretcher and taken back to the SSS detention facility in an ambulance.
The third decision on interim measures and the decision to lift the application of Rule 39 of the Rules of Court
73.  On 17 November 2021 the President of the Section to which the case was allocated considered whether the application under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court should continue in view of the information submitted by the parties up to that point, and decided that Rule 39 would continue to be applied until further notice, with modified interim measures. In particular, the Government were asked to ensure that the applicant was provided with appropriate medical treatment in detention, either on an outpatient or inpatient basis, as considered appropriate by qualified doctors. The Government were also asked to inform the Court periodically, starting with an initial deadline of 19 January 2022 and then every three months thereafter, of the applicant’s state of health and the medical treatment provided, if the applicant remained in detention.
74.  The Government did not provide any of the information requested under the above-mentioned decision by the first deadline of 19 January 2022. Following a reminder by the Court that the failure of a Contracting State to comply with a measure indicated under Rule 39 may entail a finding of a breach of Article 34 of the Convention, on 21 February 2022 the Government submitted their first periodic report.
75.  The report stated that starting from 19 November 2021, the applicant’s health had been being monitored by the medical staff of the GMD and the SSS detention facility and that appropriate medical assistance was provided to him when necessary. Although the applicant was under constant medical supervision, he did not always take the prescribed medication regularly or follow other recommendations, including that of taking regular physical exercise, and he continued to smoke. In January 2022 he was provided dental treatment, and in February 2022 he underwent blood tests. During this period, while the applicant’s general condition was mostly stable and no requests were being received from him, in the course of two court hearings in January 2022 he had experienced emotional tension and high blood pressure. He had been offered sedative and hypotensive medication, which he had refused to take, and he had insisted on continuing to participate in the hearings.
76.  According to the applicant, from 19 November 2021 he was “effectively banned” from being attended by any doctors and his requests to be seen by three private doctors of his own choice were rejected.
77.  The Government submitted their next periodic report on 4 May 2022 (after the second deadline of 19 April 2022 indicated by the Court and following another reminder). According to the report, the applicant’s health was generally stable and was satisfactory overall. There had been some episodes of heightened emotional tension and high blood pressure, which had returned to normal after the applicant had been given the appropriate medication. In the meantime, on 3 May 2022 the applicant wrote to the Court, briefly and without any further factual detail, saying that the authorities had “persistently den[ied]” him access to doctors for the “past eight months” and that he had not received any medical assistance.
78.  The Government submitted their next three periodic reports on 25 July 2022 (after the deadline of 19 July 2022), by the deadline of 19 October 2022, and on 23 January 2023 (after the deadline of 19 January 2022), providing the following information.
79.  Following his criminal conviction, in April 2022 the applicant was transferred to Prison Facility no. 9 under the Ministry of Justice and since then his health had been monitored by the Medical Department of the Ministry of Justice. The following medical care and assistance were provided:
- On 5 and 6 May 2022 he was examined by a departmental head of the Medical Department of the Ministry of Justice and underwent a number of tests, including blood tests.
-  From 10 May 2022 he was placed in the medical-sanitary unit of the penal facility, where he remained for an unspecified period of time, for the observation of his chronic conditions.
-  On 4 June 2022 he was examined by a cardiologist and underwent a number of tests. No significant changes were observed since his previous examinations at the SSS medical facilities.
-  On 23 June 2022, following a request by his lawyers, he was examined by a private doctor of his choice. Based on the doctor’s recommendations, a number of laboratory and instrumental examinations and various blood tests were carried out. No serious pathological changes were observed. Several more visits by the same doctor were ensured at later dates, in particular two visits in September 2022 and nine visits after 19 October 2022.
-  On 7 July 2022 the applicant was examined by an ophthalmologist.
-  Given that the applicant had reported that he had diabetes, on 16, 18 and 21 July 2022 he was seen by an endocrinologist who observed his blood sugar levels on different days and further blood sugar level analyses were carried out by a private clinic. His prescription was adjusted and he was instructed to follow a strict diet. It was also established that the applicant did not have diabetes and, at this time, he was diagnosed with “pre-diabetes, insulin resistance”. Periodic weekly supervision by an endocrinologist continued after that.
-  On 20 July 2022 the applicant was seen by a neurologist who recommended additional instrumental examinations.
-  On 28 July 2022 the applicant underwent a colour Doppler ultrasound examination of his carotid arteries, an electroneuromyography, and an MRI of his brain and spinal cord area at the Central Clinical Hospital. No serious pathological changes were observed and his treatment was adjusted from that previously prescribed.
-  On 12 August and 15 September 2022 the applicant was examined by a cardiologist and a therapist respectively. New cardiology tests were carried out and no negative changes were observed.
-  In November 2002 the applicant was examined by a therapist and a neurologist, and in December 2022 and January 2023 by a cardiologist of the Medical Department of the Ministry of Justice. Several related tests and examinations were carried out again and no significant changes were observed.
-  In December 2022 the applicant underwent twelve sessions of physiotherapy for neck and back ache, which had a positive effect for a certain period of time; however, the pain later returned.
-  In January 2023 the applicant underwent a number of other examinations, including audiometry, videonystagmography and, at his own request, an x-ray examination of his right shoulder which did not reveal any serious pathology.
80.  Throughout the above-mentioned period, the applicant mainly complained of cramp-like pains in the head, neck and back, occasional falls after losing his balance, dizziness when making sudden movements, hypertension and palpitations. His overall health was generally assessed as satisfactory following the appropriate medical examinations and, according to the Government, the applicant’s lawyers and family members were kept informed about the applicant’s health and were given copies of the medical records. According to the applicant, the medical assistance provided by the medical staff from the prison facility during the above-mentioned period was not fully adequate and sufficient and there was no improvement in his state of health, but “the relevant State medical bodies [were] trying to provide appropriate medical assistance within their capabilities”.
81.  Following the Government’s repeated requests for the interim measures to be lifted, and the applicant’s submission of 2 March 2023 that he did not object to that, and given the information provided by the parties, on 13 April 2023 the President of the Section to which the case was allocated decided to lift the interim measures indicated under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court.
RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK
82.  The relevant provisions of the CCrP concerning pre-trial detention are described in detail in the Court’s judgments in Farhad Aliyev v. Azerbaijan (no. 37138/06, §§ 83-102, 9 November 2010) and Muradverdiyev v. Azerbaijan (no. 16966/06, §§ 3549, 9 December 2010). The relevant international reports and documents are summarised in Yunusova and Yunusov v. Azerbaijan (no. 59620/14, §§ 100-01, 2 June 2016).
