THE LAW
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE CONVENTION
83.  The applicant complained that he had not been provided with adequate medical treatment in detention. Article 3 of the Convention provides as follows:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
Admissibility
The parties’ submissions
84.  The Government argued that the applicant had not exhausted domestic remedies. In particular, they submitted that the applicant’s domestic appeals had only challenged his pre-trial detention and its extensions and that he had not lodged any complaints with the domestic courts concerning his allegedly inadequate medical treatment in detention. The applicant had also not made any formal complaint either to the prosecuting authorities or to the courts against the detention facility administration in connection with the alleged lack of adequate medical treatment.
85.  The applicant disagreed with the Government’s objection and submitted that he had raised the issue of inadequate medical treatment a number of times with various authorities. In particular, on 23 February 2021 he had made a request to the Prosecutor General’s Office to be examined by three private doctors in view of the deterioration of his health, but the decision on his request had been “unlawfully postponed”. In April 2021 the applicant’s lawyer had applied to the Binagadi District Court under the judicial supervision procedure, challenging that postponement, requesting an examination by the three private doctors and arguing that the applicant had not been provided with adequate medical treatment, but his application was rejected by the first-instance and appellate courts (see paragraphs 40-43 above). Moreover, he had raised grievances concerning the lack of adequate medical treatment in his appeals against the decisions to extend his pre-trial detention and during the hearings at the Baku Court of Serious Crimes.
The Court’s assessment
86.  The Court reiterates that the rule that domestic remedies must be exhausted set out in Article 35 § 1 of the Convention obliges applicants first to use the remedies that are normally available and sufficient in the domestic legal system to obtain redress for the Convention breaches alleged. The existence of the remedies must be sufficiently certain, in practice as well as in theory, failing which they will lack the requisite accessibility and effectiveness. Article 35 § 1 also requires that complaints which an applicant intends subsequently to bring before the Court should be made first to the appropriate domestic body, at least in substance and in compliance with the formal requirements laid down in domestic law, although there is no obligation to have recourse to remedies which are inadequate or ineffective (see Shuriyya Zeynalov v. Azerbaijan, no. 69460/12, § 38, 10 September 2020, with further references). Moreover, where the fundamental right to protection against torture, inhuman and degrading treatment is concerned, the preventive and compensatory remedies have to be complementary in order to be considered effective (see Ananyev and Others v. Russia, nos. 42525/07 and 60800/08, § 98, 10 January 2012, and Dirdizov v. Russia, no. 41461/10, § 73, 27 November 2012).
87.  As regards where the burden of proof lies, if the Government claims nonexhaustion it must satisfy the Court that the remedy it refers to was an effective one available both in theory and in practice at the relevant time, that is, that it was accessible, capable of providing redress for the applicant’s complaints and offered reasonable prospects of success. Once this burden of proof has been discharged, it falls to the applicant to establish that the remedy suggested by the Government was in fact exhausted, or was for some reason inadequate and ineffective in the particular circumstances of the case, or that there existed special circumstances absolving him or her from this requirement (see Yunusova and Yunusov v. Azerbaijan, no. 59620/14, § 126, 2 June 2016, with further references).
88.  Turning to the circumstances of the present case, the Court observes at the outset that the Government merely noted that the applicant had not lodged any complaints with the prosecuting authorities or courts concerning his medical treatment in detention. They neither specified what type of remedy would have been an effective remedy in their view, nor provided any further information as to how such a remedy could have prevented the alleged violation or its continuation or provided the applicant with adequate redress. In this connection, the Court also observes that it has already rejected similar objections raised by the Government in previous cases (see Yunusova and Yunusov, cited above, §§ 122-30, and Aliyev v. Azerbaijan, nos. 68762/14 and 71200/14, §§ 100-06, 20 September 2018) and sees no reason to reach a different conclusion in the present case.
89.  The Court also notes that the applicant’s attempts to obtain redress for the alleged violations of his rights under the CCrP were to no avail as the domestic courts refused to entertain his complaints for want of jurisdiction (see paragraph 43 above).
90.  The Court therefore dismisses the Government’s objection of nonexhaustion of domestic remedies. It further notes that this complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
91.  The applicant submitted that the authorities had refused his repeated requests for adequate medical supervision and treatment that was regular and systematic and involved a comprehensive therapeutic strategy, including, inter alia, medical examinations by “independent” doctors. This had resulted in incorrect and inconsistent diagnoses which had failed to address the seriousness of his illnesses. He was transferred to the MMD Hospital only for short periods of time and was not offered continued inpatient care. He underwent a polypectomy after his first transfer to the MMD Hospital, following the Court’s second indication under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court. This delayed medical intervention came after “intolerable aggravation of his condition” which caused him unbearable pain and difficulties. The applicant submitted that, even when the Court’s decisions on interim measures applied, there had been some periods when he had not received any medical treatment or had access to doctors. Moreover, he argued that a number of diagnoses made by the MMD and other doctors and/or treatment prescribed by them were incorrect.
92.  The Government submitted that the applicant had been provided with adequate medical assistance and treatment during his detention. During that time, he had undergone surgery and had been under constant and adequate medical supervision. When necessary, he had been transferred to the MMD Hospital and after his health had stabilised he was returned to the pre-trial detention facility.
The Court’s assessment
General principles
93.  The Court reiterates that Article 3 of the Convention enshrines one of the most fundamental values of democratic societies. It prohibits in absolute terms torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, irrespective of the circumstances and the victim’s conduct (see, among other authorities, Labita v. Italy [GC], no. 26772/95, § 199, ECHR 2000-IV). Illtreatment must attain a minimum level of severity if it is to fall within the scope of Article 3. Assessment of this minimum level depends on all the circumstances of the case, such as the duration of the treatment, its physical or mental effects and, in some cases, the sex, age and state of health of the victim (see, among other authorities, Kudła v. Poland [GC], no. 30210/96, § 91, ECHR 2000-XI, and Muršić v. Croatia [GC], no. 7334/13, § 97, 20 October 2016). Although the purpose of such treatment is a factor to be taken into account, in particular whether it was intended to humiliate or debase the victim, the absence of any such purpose does not inevitably lead to a finding that there has been no violation of Article 3 (see Peers v. Greece, no. 28524/95, § 74, ECHR 2001-III, and Stanev v. Bulgaria [GC], no. 36760/06, § 203, ECHR 2012).
94.  The State must ensure that a person is detained in conditions which are compatible with respect for his human dignity, that the manner and method of the execution of the measure do not subject him to distress or hardship of an intensity exceeding the unavoidable level of suffering inherent in detention and that, given the practical demands of imprisonment, his health and well-being are adequately secured (see Kudła, cited above, § 94; Muršić, cited above, § 99; and Rooman v. Belgium [GC], no. 18052/11, § 143, 31 January 2019). Furthermore, when assessing conditions of detention, account has to be taken of the cumulative effects of those conditions, as well as the specific allegations made by the applicant (see Ramirez Sanchez v. France [GC], no. 59450/00, § 119, ECHR 2006IX, and Schmidt and Šmigol v. Estonia, nos. 3501/20 and 2 others, § 122, 28 November 2023).
95.  In exceptional cases, where a detainee’s state of health is absolutely incompatible with his or her detention, Article 3 may require the release of that person under certain conditions. However, Article 3 cannot be construed as laying down a general obligation to release detainees on health grounds. It rather imposes an obligation on the State to protect the physical well-being of persons deprived of their liberty by, among other things, providing them with the requisite medical assistance. Medical treatment provided within prison facilities must be appropriate, that is, at a level comparable to that which the State authorities have committed themselves to provide to the population as a whole. Nevertheless, this does not mean that every detainee must be guaranteed the same level of medical treatment as is available in the best health establishments outside prison facilities. A lack of appropriate medical care and, more generally, the detention in inappropriate conditions of a person who is ill may in principle amount to treatment contrary to Article 3 (see Yunusova and Yunusov, cited above, § 138, with further references).
Application of these principles in the present case
96.  Having had regard to the particular circumstances of the present case and the parties’ submissions, the Court considers that the present complaint should be examined with regard to two distinct time periods, namely the period between the applicant’s arrest on 13 August 2020 and his first transfer to the MMD Hospital on 2 July 2021, and the period after 2 July 2021.
Period between 13 August 2020 and 2 July 2021
97.  The Court notes that the material in the case file demonstrates – and it was not disputed by the parties – that, when detained, the applicant had been suffering from several chronic conditions and illnesses including, among other things, multiple spinal disc herniations and protrusions and spinal cord compressions, various heart and cardiovascular conditions, colon problems and type 2 diabetes, and that he was taking up to twenty types of medication on a daily basis. The Court therefore observes that, although nothing suggests that these conditions were in principle incompatible with detention, they required appropriate medical supervision and care on a regular, systematic and comprehensive basis, taking into account the various conditions the applicant was suffering from and his relatively advanced age.
98.  The Court reiterates in this regard that the “adequacy” of medical assistance remains the most difficult element to determine. The mere fact that a detainee was seen by a doctor and prescribed a certain form of treatment cannot automatically lead to the conclusion that the medical assistance was adequate. The authorities must also ensure that diagnosis and care are prompt and accurate and that, where necessitated by the nature of a medical condition, supervision is regular and systematic and involves a comprehensive therapeutic strategy aimed at adequately treating the detainee’s health problems or preventing their aggravation. The authorities must also show that the necessary conditions were created for the prescribed treatment to be actually followed through (see Blokhin v. Russia [GC], no. 47152/06, § 137, 23 March 2016, and Yunusova and Yunusov, cited above, § 142, both with further references).
99.  The Court also reiterates that it is not necessary to show that a failure to provide requisite medical assistance led to a medical emergency or otherwise caused severe or prolonged pain to find that a detainee was subjected to treatment incompatible with the guarantees of Article 3. The fact that a detainee needed and requested such assistance but it was unavailable to him may, in certain circumstances, suffice to conclude that such treatment was degrading within the meaning of that Article (see Sarban v. Moldova, no. 3456/05, §§ 86-87 and 90, 4 October 2005, and Davtyan v. Armenia, no. 29736/06, § 88, 31 March 2015).
100.  After his arrest, between 14 August and 30 September 2020, the applicant was seen relatively regularly, around twenty times in total, usually by the same doctor, who appears to have been a member of the SSS detention facility’s medical staff. While some tests were conducted, namely an ultrasound examination, a blood test and an ECG, it is not entirely clear what conclusions they led to. Most of the entries in the medical record book corresponding to this period were brief and concerned the applicant’s recurring complaints. It appears that the doctor suggested, inter alia, a colonoscopy and a visit from a neurosurgeon, which the applicant refused because of his “lack of trust” of unfamiliar doctors. However, it is not entirely clear from those entries what the doctor’s reasons for those recommendations were or why no further attempts were made to follow through with them despite the applicant’s refusal. It appears that, during this period, the applicant’s complaints were addressed on a symptomatic basis, without comprehensive medical examinations in order to accurately diagnose the underlying conditions and to engage a comprehensive therapeutic strategy. Furthermore, the Court notes that the medical record book did not contain any entries at all for the period between 30 September 2020 and 12 March 2021, which suggests that for some reason regular visits by the detention facility doctor may have abruptly stopped at the end of September 2020.
101.  Nevertheless, the available material demonstrates that on 16, 19 and 28 October 2020 the applicant was examined by three specialist doctors. On the basis of the applicant’s medical records before his arrest and an MRI scan conducted on 26 October 2020 and following physical examinations, they concluded that he was suffering from various conditions and recommended a number of further examinations and specialised interventions, including a joint comprehensive examination on an inpatient basis by a committee of specialists with a view to prescribing more adequate treatment, a colonoscopy, psychotherapeutic treatment and medication for cervical herniations, and possible surgery to treat spinal disc herniations. None of those recommendations were followed through in a prompt manner in the following months, although it appears that the authorities were informed of the diagnoses and opinions of the specialists referred to.
102.  On 11 December 2020 the prosecuting authorities allowed the applicant’s lawyer’s request for an examination by a medical committee and on 27 December 2020 the applicant underwent a number of medical tests. The committee of six doctors examined the applicant only on 11 January 2021, a month after the prosecuting authorities’ decision. However, it appears that the committee saw the applicant only briefly and, reiterating the previous diagnoses that had been based on the available medical records, concluded that “an adequate course of treatment could be chosen” and, if necessary, any medical treatment could be provided at the place of pre-trial detention or in a prison medical facility, without actually recommending or prescribing any specific treatment (which, however, it was not in any event competent to do in the circumstances, given that the scope of its answers was limited to the specific questions put by the prosecuting authorities).
103.  In view of the above-mentioned delays, in February and March 2021 the applicant repeatedly asked to be examined by private doctors of his own choice at his own expense, but the decision on his request was postponed by the prosecuting authorities for around six weeks and then dismissed on 7 April 2021. The applicant’s complaints concerning this delay were rejected by the courts for lack of jurisdiction to examine complaints concerning that type of decision of the prosecuting authorities.
104.  According to the applicant, at around this time (from February 2021) his health began to deteriorate significantly and, in addition to stomach and back pain, difficulty walking, and intestinal obstructions, he consistently complained of dizziness and of often losing his balance and falling. The Court notes that the cause of the sudden falls was diagnosed as BPPV only several months later, after the interim measures had been indicated to the respondent Government. However, this symptom could have been indicative of a significantly more serious health issue, and it was not promptly and accurately diagnosed despite the applicant’s repeated complaints. On the contrary, it appears from the available documents that, around the time when the applicant’s condition began worsening, no medical examinations or tests were carried out for more than two and a half months, between the examination of the applicant by the medical committee on 11 January 2021 and early April 2021, when new blood tests were conducted. There are no medical records pertaining to this period, except two very brief and only partly legible entries in the detention facility’s medical record book concerning a visit by a therapist on 12 March 2021 apparently in connection with a Covid-19 vaccination and a visit by a neurologist on 30 March 2021. In this context the Court reiterates that it is for the authorities to ensure that a comprehensive record is kept concerning the detainee’s state of health and his or her treatment while in detention (see Blokhin, cited above, § 137).
105.  Moreover, following the blood tests conducted on 2 and 3 April 2021, it appears that the applicant was not seen by a doctor and did not undergo any medical examinations for almost another month, until the end of April 2021, after he had already lodged a Rule-39 request with the Court on 19 April 2021 and after the Government had been informed of it on 21 April 2021. Specifically, several consultations with specialist doctors and medical tests took place on 28 April 2021, treatment was prescribed and a colonoscopy recommended again.
106.  Following that, however, no specialised examinations or treatment were provided for around two more months, until 2 July 2021 when the applicant was transferred to the MMD Hospital, despite the fact that in the meantime the Court made two indications under Rule 39 of the Rules of Court (see paragraphs 50, 56 and 60 above). As for the Government’s argument that the delay in the applicant’s transfer to the MMD Hospital was attributable to the applicant who himself refused to be transferred (see paragraph 54 above), which the Court will also further examine in more detail below in the context of the complaint under Article 34 of the Convention, the Court considers, having had regard to the parties’ submissions and the documents provided (see paragraphs 53-55 above), that there was either a mere misunderstanding or miscommunication between the applicant and the authorities as to whether the authorities’ intention was to arrange an outpatient or an inpatient examination of the applicant. It nevertheless appears that the applicant was merely insisting on being transferred to the MMD Hospital on an inpatient basis and protesting against what was, in his view, the authorities’ noncompliance with the interim measures. The Court does not attach significant importance to that incident, especially taking into account the lack of adequate medical assistance during the previous months and the Government’s delayed compliance with the interim measures indicated by the Court. The Court cannot therefore conclude that the applicant had actually refused adequate medical treatment.
107.  Having regard to the above, the Court finds that the applicant did not receive adequate medical treatment for his illnesses while in detention during the period between 13 August 2020 and 2 July 2021. As a result of this lack of adequate medical treatment, he was exposed to prolonged mental and physical suffering diminishing his human dignity. The authorities’ failure to provide him with the medical care he needed amounts to inhuman and degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 3 of the Convention.
108.  There has accordingly been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention in respect of the period of the applicant’s detention between 13 August 2020 and 2 July 2021.
Period after 2 July 2021
109.  The Court notes that on 2 July 2021 the applicant was hospitalised for a period of around three weeks. A number of complex physical, laboratory and instrumental examinations were carried out and the applicant was examined by a number of qualified specialist doctors. He underwent a colonoscopy, which had been recommended several months earlier, after which a polypectomy was performed. He was diagnosed with BPPV, which turned out to be the cause of his dizziness and frequent falls, and appropriate treatment was prescribed.
110.  Following the applicant’s renewed complaints, he was again transferred to the MMD Hospital for more than two weeks, during which time more specialised tests were carried out. During this time, he was given several types of medication as part of a conservative course of treatment.
111.  As to what may be described as the conflicting medical opinions issued by a private neurologist on 2 September 2021 and an emergency doctor on 17 September 2021, who diagnosed the applicant either with the risk of or with an actual transient ischaemic attack, as well as with other illnesses, the Court observes that those diagnoses were made without any specialised medical tests. It further notes that on 15 and 16 October 2021 the applicant underwent several specialised medical tests at the MMD Hospital, where he was transferred for the third time, following which a committee of doctors convened for this purpose did not confirm the diagnoses of ischaemic heart attack and other illnesses which had not been diagnosed before the private neurologist’s opinion of 2 September 2021 (see paragraph 71 above). Neither were those diagnoses ever confirmed by the medical examinations of the applicant carried out later. As to the neurologist’s recommendation that the applicant be transferred to a specialised (non-prison) neurosurgical hospital, the Court notes that no evidence has been submitted to demonstrate that the medical facilities which were made available to the applicant during the relevant period, namely the MMD Hospital, lacked any of the medical equipment or qualified staff that would be required to carry out the recommended specialised examinations and to provide appropriate treatment.
112.  It appears that after the two instances when the applicant fainted during court hearings in September 2021, at subsequent hearings a GMD ambulance crew was on call to ensure any medical assistance he needed.
113.  As to the period following the Court’s third decision under Rule 39 of the Rule of Court of 17 November 2021, the Court notes that the Government submitted its first periodic report with a significant delay of over one month, while most of the remaining periodic reports were also submitted with delays. Nevertheless, it appears from the information submitted by the Government that throughout this period the applicant was under regular medical supervision as an outpatient, underwent a number of medical examinations, was allowed to be examined by doctors of his choice numerous times, and was prescribed and administered physiotherapeutic treatment and medication, and that his medication intake was supervised, as it was noted that he himself did not always regularly take the prescribed medication.
114.  Having regard to the above, the Court finds that during the period after 2 July 2021 the applicant received both inpatient and outpatient medical treatment which, on the whole, cannot be considered inadequate. Even assuming that there might have been some shortcomings and there might have been some time periods during which the medical supervision might not have been very regular (see, for example, the applicant’s submissions summarised in paragraphs 76-77 above), the available material does not disclose that the medical care provided to the applicant after 2 July 2021 was inadequate to such a degree as to cause him suffering reaching the minimum level of severity required by Article 3 of the Convention.
115.  There has accordingly been no violation of Article 3 of the Convention in respect of the period of the applicant’s detention after 2 July 2021.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 § 1 OF THE CONVENTION
116.  The applicant complained that his arrest and detention had not been based on reasonable grounds for suspecting that he had committed a criminal offence. Article 5 § 1 of the Convention reads as follows, in the relevant part:
“1.  Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:
...
(c)  the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so ...”
The parties’ submissions
117.  The Government submitted that there had been sufficient information and evidence giving rise to a “reasonable suspicion” that the applicant had committed the criminal offences of which he was suspected and with which he was charged.
118.  The applicant reiterated his complaint, arguing that there was no information or evidence in the prosecution’s possession or presented by it to the domestic courts which could objectively give them a reason to suspect that he had committed a criminal offence.
The Court’s assessment
119.  The Court reiterates that under the first limb of Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention, a person may be detained, in the context of criminal proceedings, only for the purpose of bringing him or her before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence. The “reasonableness” of the suspicion on which an arrest must be based forms an essential part of the safeguard laid down in Article 5 § 1 (c). Having a reasonable suspicion presupposes the existence of facts or information which would satisfy an objective observer that the person concerned may have committed the offence. What may be regarded as reasonable will, however, depend on all the circumstances (see Selahattin Demirtaş v. Turkey (no. 2) [GC], no. 14305/17, § 314, 22 December 2020, with further references).
120.  The Court has also held that Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention does not presuppose that the investigating authorities have obtained sufficient evidence to bring charges at the time of arrest. The purpose of questioning during detention under Article 5 § 1 (c) is to further the criminal investigation by confirming or dispelling the concrete suspicion grounding the arrest. Thus, facts that raise a suspicion need not be of the same level as those necessary to justify a conviction or even the bringing of a charge, which comes at the next stage of the process of criminal investigation (see Selahattin Demirtaş, cited above, § 315, with further references).
121.  As a rule, problems with the “reasonableness of suspicion” arise at the level of the facts. The question then is whether the arrest and detention were based on sufficient objective elements to justify a “reasonable suspicion” that the facts in issue had actually occurred. In addition to its factual side, the existence of a “reasonable suspicion” within the meaning of Article 5 § 1 (c) requires that the facts relied on can be reasonably considered to fall under one of the sections of the law dealing with criminal behaviour. Thus, there could clearly not be a “reasonable suspicion” if the acts or facts held against a detained person did not constitute a crime at the time when they occurred (ibid., § 317, with further references).
122.  The Court reiterates that when assessing the “reasonableness” of a suspicion, it must be able to ascertain whether the essence of the safeguard afforded by Article 5 § 1 (c) has been secured. Consequently, the respondent Government have to furnish at least some facts or information capable of satisfying the Court that the arrested person was reasonably suspected of having committed the alleged offence (ibid., § 319).
123.  While reasonable suspicion must exist at the time of the arrest and initial detention, it must also be shown, in cases of prolonged detention, that the suspicion persisted and remained “reasonable” throughout the detention (ibid., § 320).
124.  In the present case, the applicant was initially suspected of the aggravated abuse of official authority and using State funds otherwise than for their designated purpose, and, in addition, was later charged with the criminal offences of laundering the proceeds of crime in large amounts, forgery by an official, and embezzlement or squandering in large amounts. It is not disputed that all of the above qualified as criminal offences under the domestic law.
125.  It appears that the initial suspicion about the applicant was based on information provided by the Ministry of Finance (available in the case file) about suspected unlawful expenditure and overspending of State funds and breach of financial accountability in the Azerbaijani Embassy in Serbia, corroborated by a witness statement (see paragraphs 9, 11 and 15 above). Within the meaning of the previously cited case-law, such evidence objectively linked the applicant to the alleged criminal offences of abuse of official authority and using State funds otherwise than for their designated purpose, and was sufficient to have created “reasonable suspicion” about him. Accordingly, the suspicion created by the initial information received by the authorities was reasonable at the time of his arrest and initial detention. Furthermore, from the material in the case file it appears that relatively promptly, about a month after the applicant had been arrested and charged, further evidence was obtained by the investigation which supported the initial suspicion, as well as giving rise to suspicion that he had committed the other criminal offences with which he was subsequently charged (see paragraph 19 above).
126.  The Court considers that, in the circumstances of the present case, the available evidence, which was described in the prosecution’s submissions to the courts and in the relevant court decisions, would raise a reasonable suspicion in an objective observer that the applicant had committed the criminal offences referred to and that it has not been shown that the evidence was not sufficient for this suspicion to persist throughout the entire period of his pretrial detention (compare Farhad Aliyev v. Azerbaijan, no. 37138/06, §§ 140-43, 9 November 2010; Rafig Aliyev v. Azerbaijan, no. 45875/06, §§ 76-79, 6 December 2011; and Zayidov v. Azerbaijan, no. 11948/08, §§ 4346, 20 February 2014).
127.  For these reasons, the Court finds that this part of the application is manifestly ill-founded and must be rejected in accordance with Article 35 §§ 3 (a) and 4 of the Convention.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 § 3 OF THE CONVENTION
128.  The applicant complained under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention that the domestic courts had failed to justify the need for his pre-trial detention and to provide reasons for his continued detention. Article 5 § 3 of the Convention reads as follows:
“Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 (c) of this Article shall be ... entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.”
Admissibility
129.  The Court notes that this complaint is neither manifestly illfounded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
130.  The applicant maintained his complaint.
131.  The Government submitted that the domestic courts had given sufficient and relevant reasons for the applicant’s pre-trial detention.
The Court’s assessment
132.  The Court refers to the general principles established in its case-law and set out in Buzadji v. the Republic of Moldova ([GC], no. 23755/07, §§ 8491, 5 July 2016), which are equally pertinent to the present case.
133.  As regards the period to be taken into consideration for the purposes of Article 5 § 3, this commenced on 13 August 2020, when the applicant was arrested (see paragraph 10 above), and ended on 21 January 2022, when the Baku Court of Serious Crimes convicted him (see paragraph 29 above). The applicant was therefore held in pretrial detention for one year, five months and eight days in total.
134.  The applicant was brought before a judge on 14 August 2020, the day after his arrest, and the Sabail District Court ordered the applicant’s remand in custody until 3 November 2020, finding that there was a risk that he would obstruct the investigation by influencing potential witnesses and that his release “could evoke negative emotions in society”. The Court notes, however, that the first-instance court did not provide any reasons why it considered those grounds relevant in the applicant’s case. Nevertheless, the Court notes that, following the applicant’s appeal, the Baku Court of Appeal limited the justification for the applicant’s detention only to the ground that there was a risk of the applicant obstructing the investigation by illegally influencing participants in the proceedings. In this connection, the appellate court in its decision referred, albeit briefly, to the prosecution’s submission that on 13 August 2020, the day of the applicant’s arrest, an unnamed employee of the Azerbaijani Embassy in Serbia who had a close personal relationship with the applicant had attempted to hide or otherwise tamper with some documentary evidence at the applicant’s official residence (see paragraphs 14 and 15 above). The Court observes that if this reasoning is coupled with the reasoning in the Nasimi District Court’s subsequent decision of 12 September 2020 refusing to release the applicant on bail, which was upheld by the Baku Court of Appeal on 22 September 2020 (see paragraphs 17-18 above), then, despite the reasoning being very brief, it appears the Baku Court of Appeal may also have taken the view that the prosecution’s submission suggested that the applicant might have been personally implicated in attempts to tamper with the evidence. The courts deciding on the initial period of the applicant’s pretrial detention (from 14 August to 3 November 2020) could therefore arguably be considered to have provided, albeit briefly, relevant and sufficient reasons for detaining the applicant. However, in the circumstances of the present case, the Court does not consider it necessary to make a determination in this regard because, even assuming that relevant and sufficient reasons had been provided for that initial period of detention, the subsequent decisions extending the applicant’s detention lacked such reasons.
135.  In particular, in its extension order of 23 October 2020, the Nasimi District Court merely observed that the grounds for the applicant’s detention “had not ceased to exist”, without providing any reasons for that conclusion (see paragraph 21 above). It appears to the Court from the case material that by then the prosecuting authorities had obtained more documentary and other evidence against the applicant in the framework of the criminal proceedings, which apparently included documents from the Embassy in Serbia, and that this evidence was the basis for further charges brought against the applicant on 18 September 2020. However, the Nasimi District Court’s extension order of 23 October 2020 contained no reasoned reassessment of the circumstances which had been the original basis for finding that, in the initial stages of the investigation, there was a risk that the investigation would be obstructed by tampering with evidence, and no further or other reasons were given for finding that the grounds for the applicant’s detention “had not ceased to exist”. Likewise, following the applicant’s appeal against the extension order, no reasons were provided by the Baku Court of Appeal for finding that there was still a risk that the investigation would be obstructed. Moreover, in addition, the appellate court also held, for the first time, that there was a risk of the applicant absconding, without providing any reasons for this finding (see paragraph 22 above). Similarly, all the subsequent first-instance and appellate decisions extending the applicant’s detention and refusing to order house arrest instead also found that those two grounds had not ceased to exist, without providing any reasoning (see paragraphs 23-24 and 26-28 above).
136.  Accordingly, the Court observes that in their decisions extending the detention of the applicant the domestic courts used a standard template and limited themselves to repeating a number of grounds for detention in an abstract and stereotyped way, without giving any reasoning why they considered those grounds relevant to the applicant’s case. They failed to mention any facts specific to the applicant’s case which were relevant to those grounds and to support those grounds with relevant and sufficient reasons. The Court has repeatedly found violations of Article 5 § 3 in previous Azerbaijani cases where similar shortcomings were noted and analysed in detail (see, among others, Farhad Aliyev, cited above, §§ 19194; Muradverdiyev v. Azerbaijan, no. 16966/06, §§ 87-91, 9 December 2010; Zayidov, cited above, §§ 6469; and Avaz Zeynalov v. Azerbaijan, nos. 37816/12 and 25260/14, §§ 60-62, 22 April 2021).
137.  In view of the foregoing considerations, the Court finds that the legal issue raised under Article 5 § 3 of the Convention in the present case, in so far as it relates to the extensions of the applicant’s pre-trial detention, is essentially repetitive of those earlier cases and it does not see any fact or argument capable of persuading it to reach a different conclusion. The Court therefore considers that the authorities failed to give “relevant” and “sufficient” reasons for the applicant’s continued pretrial detention.
138.  Accordingly, there has been a violation of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 5 § 4 OF THE CONVENTION
139.  The applicant complained under Article 5 § 4 of the Convention that the judicial review of his pre-trial detention had been inadequate.
140.  Having regard to the facts of the case, the submissions of the parties, and its findings above (see paragraphs 132-138 above), the Court considers that there is no need to examine the admissibility and merits of this complaint (see Centre for Legal Resources on behalf of Valentin Câmpeanu v. Romania [GC], no. 47848/08, § 156, ECHR 2014, and Sardar Babayev v. Azerbaijan, nos. 34015/17 and 26896/18, §§ 53-54, 1 February 2024).
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 18 OF THE CONVENTION in conjunction with article 5 of the convention
141.  On 8 March 2022 the applicant raised a complaint under Article 18 of the Convention that his rights under Article 5 of the Convention had been restricted for purposes other than those prescribed in the Convention, which reads as follows:
“The restrictions permitted under [the] Convention to the said rights and freedoms shall not be applied for any purpose other than those for which they have been prescribed.”
The parties’ submissions
The Government
142.  The Government submitted, firstly, that the applicant had raised this complaint for the first time in his submissions dated 8 March 2022, which was more than four months after the date of the relevant final domestic decision concerning the applicant’s pre-trial detention. They argued, therefore, that the complaint had been lodged out of time.
143.  The Government argued, secondly, that the applicant had not raised the complaint and arguments raised before the Court in the domestic courts. The complaint that the applicant made in his submissions to the Binagadi District Court on 25 June 2021 was not “sufficient evidence” that the domestic remedies had been exhausted because it was made after he had lodged his application form with the Court.
144.  Commenting on the applicant’s specific arguments (see paragraphs 145-150 below), the Government further submitted that the applicant had been prosecuted for criminal offences such as forgery by an official, money laundering and embezzlement of State funds. None of the accusations against the applicant even remotely concerned the applicant’s political activity. The acts of which he was accused were not related to “his participation in political life, real or imagined”, his criticisms or some reasons of vengeance. The applicant had failed to substantiate and prove beyond reasonable doubt the existence of any ulterior purpose. His arguments were based on “irrelevant references to past events” of decades before and were mere “theories of a sophisticated political conspiracy against [him]” which could not be indicative of an ulterior purpose. No evidence had been presented by the applicant to support his claim that he was a leading political figure suspected of having links with the opposition and, on the contrary, he had been a State official for many years and appeared to have always been a strong supporter of the current government. Even if the applicant had criticised members of the Russian diplomatic corps or Russian policy towards Azerbaijan, there was no evidence that this had led to his arrest or had given rise to a predominant ulterior motive for prosecuting him. As to the applicant’s argument concerning the alleged vindictive aspects of the relationship between him and a senior government official, it referred to the events of more than twenty years before and amounted to accusations against specific individuals without any evidence or legal basis. As a whole, the applicant’s complaint under Article 18 was nothing more than mere speculation and an attempt to avoid being held accountable.
The applicant
145.  The applicant submitted that he was “an active participant in Azerbaijani politics and a leading figure in Azerbaijani society”. Before his arrest he had served as Prosecutor General and as an Ambassador to various countries. His argued that his rights under Article 5 of the Convention were restricted for purposes other than those prescribed under that provision.
146.  He argued firstly that his arrest and detention were related to his alleged role, as the Ambassador to Serbia, in the sale of arms by Serbia to Armenia, which had come to light in July 2020. The applicant submitted in support of that argument that on 15 July 2020, during a meeting of the Cabinet of Ministers, the President of Azerbaijan had sharply criticised the activities of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the context of the ongoing July 2020 Armenia-Azerbaijan border clashes, following which on 16 July the President had dismissed the Minister of Foreign Affairs from his post. According to the applicant, “at the same meeting”, the President stated, inter alia:
“Some of our diplomats abroad are turning into envoys of the countries in which they work. This must end. This is also a manifestation of erroneous staff policy. Some diplomats have betrayed the state and committed treason and are not concealing it. They are controlled by the secret services of the countries they live in. We have sufficient information...”
147.  The applicant was arrested on 13 August 2020, after Azerbaijan had “criticised Serbia for selling arms to Armenia”. Following his arrest, several media sources (the applicant mentioned four such media sources, namely teref.az, musavat.com, Caucasus Watch and JAM-News) published articles stating that the applicant had been arrested “on suspicion of treason” and/or in connection with the sale of arms by Serbia to Armenia. Moreover, the applicant submitted that, during a search in his office in the Embassy in Serbia, the authorities had seized diplomatic correspondence with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs concerning arms sales to Armenia as well as copies of newspaper articles concerning that matter.
148.  Secondly, the applicant argued that another reason for his arrest and the criminal proceedings against him was his criticism of the Russian Federation’s foreign policy towards Azerbaijan and of the Russian Foreign Minister. In support of this argument, the applicant submitted a copy of an interview he had given to a media source named Moderator.az which had been published in January 2017 and in which he had made critical comments apparently in connection with a then recent statement by the Russian Foreign Minister to the effect that the Karabakh conflict was not entirely an internal Azerbaijani affair.
149.  Thirdly, in his observations, the applicant argued that another reason for his arrest and the criminal proceedings against him was that he was seen as a strong political figure with potential links to opposition parties in Azerbaijan. In this connection, in his observations in respect of the present complaint, which was made on 8 March 2022, he referred to a number of articles published in various media sources which he had mentioned in the supplement to his original application form of 19 February 2021. They contained allegations or statements that the applicant had been involved in power struggles within the “party in power” or opinions voiced from the point of view of the political opposition, concerning the potential effects of his arrest on them. In his submissions in the supplement to the original application form, which were made before the present complaint under Article 18 was raised, the applicant stated, in connection with those specific media articles, that the domestic media had often made comments about his “having political claims, contacts with the political opposition, and other implausible accusations” against him.
150.  Lastly, the applicant argued that yet another reason for his arrest and the criminal proceedings against him was the hostile relationship between him and A., the Head of the Department for Working with the LawEnforcement Authorities at the Presidential Administration. During the applicant’s tenure as Prosecutor General between 1995 to 2000, a close relative of A. had been prosecuted and convicted. The applicant said that because of this, during the following twenty years while he had been an ambassador to various countries, A. “had not stopped being hostile towards the applicant and his children, family members and relatives. All of [the applicant’s] children were forced to leave Azerbaijan”. Following the applicant’s arrest, A.’s above-mentioned relative had given an interview in which he called the applicant an “unworthy son of his Motherland ... turning a blind eye to [the sale of weapons to Armenia], wanting to carry out a coup in the country to become a leader” and alleged that the applicant had political ambitions and “wanted to become a president”.
151.  The applicant argued that he had repeatedly and sufficiently brought his grievances relating to the present complaint under Article 18 of the Convention to the attention of the domestic courts.
The Court’s assessment
152.  As to the Government’s objection concerning the four-month timelimit, the Court reiterates that the applicant’s pre-trial detention ended on 21 January 2022, when the Baku Court of Serious Crimes convicted him (see paragraph 133 above). Accordingly, since the present complaint under Article 18 is raised in conjunction with the applicant’s complaint under Article 5, the time-limit for lodging that complaint started to run on that date, which marked the end of the applicant’s pre-trial detention (see, mutatis mutandis, Solmaz v. Turkey, no. 27561/02, § 36, 16 January 2007, and Bordikov v. Russia, no. 921/03, § 80, 8 October 2009). Protocol No. 15 to the Convention, which entered into force on 1 August 2021, has amended Article 35 § 1 of the Convention to reduce the period for lodging an application from six to four months and, according to the transitional provisions of the Protocol (Article 8 § 3), this amendment applies only after a period of six months following the entry into force of the Protocol, that is starting from 1 February 2022. Accordingly, on the date when the applicant’s pre-trial detention ended, which was before 1 February 2022, the six-month timelimit still applied. The present complaint was lodged on 8 March 2022, less than six months after 21 January 2022. Accordingly, the Court rejects the Government’s objection.
153.  As to the Government’s objection concerning non-exhaustion of domestic remedies, the Court notes that, indeed, it appears from the material in the case file that most of the applicant’s arguments made before the Court have not been raised before the domestic courts. However, it does not consider it necessary to determine whether the applicant has exhausted the domestic remedies because, even assuming that he did do so, the complaint is in any event inadmissible for the reasons specified below.
154.  The Court refers to the general principles concerning the interpretation and application of Article 18 of the Convention, in particular as set out in its judgments in Merabishvili v. Georgia ([GC], no. 72508/13, §§ 287-317, 28 November 2017) and Navalnyy v. Russia ([GC], nos. 29580/12 and 4 others, §§ 164-65, 15 November 2018) (see also Selahattin Demirtaş, cited above, § 421).
155.  The Court has already found that the applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention served a purpose prescribed under Article 5 § 1 (c) of the Convention (see paragraphs 119-127 above) (contrast Ilgar Mammadov v. Azerbaijan, no. 15172/13, § 141, 22 May 2014, and compare Merabishvili, cited above, § 318). It has also found that the domestic authorities had failed to give “relevant” and “sufficient” reasons for the applicant’s continued pretrial detention, in breach of Article 5 § 3 of the Convention (see paragraphs 137-138 above). It has not been argued that those measures constituted a restriction of any other rights of the applicant under the Convention. It follows that, even if it is established that the restriction of his right to liberty also pursued a purpose not prescribed by Article 5 § 1 (c), there will only be a breach of Article 18 if that other purpose was predominant (ibid.).
156.  The Court notes that the applicant has not clearly defined what he says the ulterior purpose or purposes behind the arrest actually were, instead essentially presenting four different groups of arguments which, in his view, pointed to the existence of such an ulterior purpose or purposes. However, these arguments do not appear to be inter-related with each other in any cohesive manner and could even be described as completely unrelated to each other.
157.  As to the argument that the actual reasons for the applicant’s arrest were related to the Serbian arms sales to Armenia, the Court observes the following. The statement by the President which the applicant referred to (see paragraph 146 above) did not mention him by name. Having regard to this statement both out of context and in the context of the longer speech made by the President during a meeting with the new Minister where he touched on many other points, it is not possible to identify the applicant as one of the diplomats referred to in the specific quotation. Neither did the applicant explain why exactly he considered that this statement could be interpreted as referring to him personally. Furthermore, while it is true that the applicant was arrested and then dismissed from his post of the Ambassador to Serbia relatively soon after the row concerning the arms sales by Serbia to Armenia, in the absence of other direct or circumstantial evidence or information on the relevant primary facts, this close timing by itself is too tenuous a basis to conclude that his arrest and subsequent detention were made for an ulterior purpose.
158.  In this connection, the Court further observes that the applicant also submitted that, following his arrest, several articles were published in various media linking his arrest to the arms sales issue. However, those publications referred either to unclear or unnamed sources or to some analysts’ opinions as to what the reason for the applicant’s arrest might have been. Those publications were relatively short articles mainly conveying the news of the applicant’s arrest. It cannot be discerned from their content whether or not they were based on any hard evidence or facts. They did not refer to any public statement made by a State official in respect of the applicant. On the contrary, precisely because the applicant’s arrest followed so soon after the then recent arms sales question had been raised that it might have been expected that some journalists and analysts would attempt to clarify whether that was the actual cause of the applicant’s arrest. However, as the case material demonstrates and contrary to what was stated in some of those publications, the applicant was not actually arrested for “treason” and, moreover, it appears that the publications of that nature were very few and limited in time to the immediate aftermath of the applicant’s arrest, and that no more information of that kind was published subsequently as the criminal proceedings against the applicant progressed. While the Court takes note of the opinions voiced in the media about the applicant’s case, it reiterates that, as the political process and the judicial process are fundamentally different, the Court must base its decisions on “evidence in the legal sense” and its own assessment of the specific relevant facts (see Ilgar Mammadov, cited above, § 140).
159.  As to the applicant’s further submission that diplomatic correspondence concerning the arms sales was seized from his work office in the Embassy, having considered the record of an inspection that took place on 13 August 2020, the Court observes that this correspondence was among many other documents and items listed as having been found in his office during the inspection. However, as the record clearly indicates, none of those items or documents, including this correspondence, were actually seized. Neither does it appear from the material available in the case file that this correspondence was ever used or referred to in any other decisions in the framework of the criminal proceedings against the applicant.
160.  While the Court is sensitive to any potential evidential difficulties that could be encountered by an applicant claiming to have been the victim of a violation of Article 18, it observes that, apart from the above-mentioned points which the applicant simply listed in his submissions, no other evidence was presented by him in this regard. Moreover, he failed to provide a meaningful and detailed explanation as to what his role, as an Ambassador, actually was in the matter relating to the arms sales in question or what in his view the authorities’ position concerning his alleged role or shortcomings in this regard might have been or why exactly he considered that this matter had led to ulterior motives for arresting him. The Court notes that the applicant was prosecuted for embezzlement, forgery by an official and other offences allegedly committed by him as the head of a diplomatic mission responsible for its financial affairs, and that he was not prosecuted for any acts related to his core professional diplomatic duties as an Ambassador. Even assuming that there might have been some dissatisfaction with the applicant’s actions or inaction as an Ambassador in connection with the question of arms sales, the Court considers that it cannot be established from the material put before it that the restriction of the applicant’s rights pursued an ulterior purpose related to the arms sales by Serbia to Armenia.
161.  As to the applicant’s argument that the actual reason for his arrest was his critical remarks about the Russian Foreign Minister and Russia’s policy towards Azerbaijan in an article that had been published in January 2017 (see paragraph 148 above), more than three and a half years before his arrest, the Court finds it completely unsubstantiated and therefore entirely implausible in the circumstances of the present case.
162.  Similarly, the Court finds that the applicant’s submissions that he was arrested because he was a strong political figure suspected of having close links with the opposition are also unsubstantiated (see paragraph 149 above). In this regard, in those submissions relating to his complaint under Article 18 raised at a later stage, he again mentioned several articles he had referred to in the supplement to his original application form, which included what he himself described as “implausible accusations”. The applicant presented no other evidence or information showing that his arrest and detention had been motivated by any ulterior purpose to do with his alleged perceived link with the opposition or his being “a strong political figure”.
163.  Lastly, as regards the applicant’s submissions concerning his personal relations with A. (see paragraph 150 above), the departmental head at the Presidential Administration, the Court notes that they essentially amounted to a statement that he had personally and singlehandedly orchestrated the entire criminal case against the applicant, in the framework of which he had been arrested and detained. The applicant’s submissions that A. had been hostile towards him and his family and relatives and had somehow “forced his children to leave Azerbaijan” are very general and vague and unsupported by any evidence and they lack even a minimal degree of factual detail. The only detail provided is that A. was allegedly hostile towards the applicant because a relative of his had been convicted during the applicant’s tenure as Prosecutor General and that that relative (and not A. himself) had publicly voiced his negative opinions about the applicant. The above information is not sufficient for a finding that the applicant’s arrest and detention were applied for an ulterior purpose.
164.  Given the above, it cannot be established that the applicant’s arrest and pre-trial detention pursued any ulterior purpose.
165.  For these reasons, the Court finds that this part of the application is manifestly ill-founded and must be rejected in accordance with Article 35 §§ 3 (a) and 4 of the Convention.
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 34 OF THE CONVENTION
166.  The applicant complained that the Government had failed to comply with the interim measures indicated by the Court under Rule 39 and had thus violated his right of individual application under Article 34 of the Convention, which reads as follows:
“The Court may receive applications from any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in the Convention or the Protocols thereto. The High Contracting Parties undertake not to hinder in any way the effective exercise of this right.”
The parties’ submissions
167.  The applicant submitted that despite two decisions on interim measures taken by the Court on 7 May and 22 June 2021 which indicated to the Government, inter alia, that the applicant should be transferred, “at the earliest possible date” and then “immediately”, to a prison medical institution as an inpatient for a comprehensive assessment of his health, the Government had failed to comply with the measures indicated in a timely manner and he had been transferred to the MMD Hospital only on 2 July 2022. In the applicant’s view and according to his interpretation of the prosecuting authorities’ letter of 22 May 2021 (see paragraph 53 above), in the meantime, between the Court’s two decisions, the authorities had intended to carry out only a “short” medical examination on an outpatient basis. Moreover, at various times the Government either did not submit plans of the applicant’s future treatment as requested by the Court or the plans submitted were not implemented. Following the Court’s third decision, on modified interim measures dated 17 November 2021, the Government submitted their periodic reports with significant delays and the information submitted was incomplete and/or misleading as to the adequacy of the medical treatment provided to the applicant.
168.  The Government submitted that they had provided detailed information concerning the applicant’s health and the medical supervision and treatment he had received, and that they had abided by all the timelimits set by the Court. As for the applicant’s allegations of the “socalled delays” in complying with the Court’s decisions of 7 May and 22 June 2021, the Government denied that there had been a violation of Article 34 and argued that those delays were attributable to the applicant’s own actions and his resistance to cooperating with the authorities, which constituted his “defence strategy”.
The Court’s assessment
General principles
169.  The Court reiterates that, by virtue of Article 34 of the Convention, Contracting States undertake to refrain from any act or omission that may hinder the effective exercise of the right of individual application, which has been consistently reaffirmed as a cornerstone of the Convention system. A respondent State’s failure to comply with an interim measure entails a violation of that right (see Mamatkulov and Askarov v. Turkey [GC], nos. 46827/99 and 46951/99, §§ 102-29, ECHR 2005-I). Such measures are indicated by the Court for the purpose of ensuring the effectiveness of the right of individual application and with a view to preventing imminent potential irreparable harm from being done. It follows from the very nature of interim measures that a decision on whether they should be indicated in a given case will often have to be made within a very short space of time. Consequently, the full facts of a case will often remain undetermined until the Court’s judgment on the merits of the complaint to which the measure is related. It is precisely for the purpose of preserving the Court’s ability to render such a judgment after an effective examination of the complaint that such measures are indicated. Until that time, it may be unavoidable for the Court to indicate interim measures on the basis of facts which, despite making a prima facie case for such measures, are subsequently added to or challenged to the point of calling into question the justification for the measures. For the same reasons, the facts that the damage which an interim measure was designed to prevent subsequently does not occur despite the State’s failure to act in full compliance with the interim measure or that information obtained subsequently suggests that the risk of harm may have been exaggerated are irrelevant for the assessment of whether a State has fulfilled its obligations under Article 34 (see Paladi v. Moldova [GC], no. 39806/05, §§ 88-89 and 104, 10 March 2009).
170.  It is not open to a Contracting State to substitute its own judgment for that of the Court in verifying whether or not there had been a real risk of immediate and irreparable damage to an applicant at the time when the interim measure was indicated. It is for the Court to verify compliance with the interim measure, while a State which considers that it is in possession of material capable of convincing the Court to annul an interim measure should inform the Court accordingly (see, mutatis mutandis, Tanrıkulu v. Turkey [GC], no. 23763/94, § 131, ECHR 1999-IV, and Paladi, cited above, § 90).
171.  A significant delay on the part of the authorities in complying with an interim measure which results in the applicant being put at risk of the kind of treatment that the measure was aimed at protecting him against constitutes a failure by the State to comply with its obligations under Article 34 of the Convention (see M.K. and Others v. Poland, nos. 40503/17 and 2 others, § 237-38, 23 July 2020, and Sy v. Italy, no. 11791/20, § 166, 24 January 2022).
Application of those principles in the present case
172.  The Court must determine whether the authorities of the respondent State have complied with the interim measures indicated by the Court on 7 May, 22 June and 17 November 2021.
173.  The interim measures indicated on 7 May 2021 included the applicant’s transfer to a prison medical facility “at the earliest possible date” as an inpatient for a comprehensive medical examination, the determination of whether any treatment was required, the assessment of any requirement for urgent interventions and, if necessary, carrying out those interventions. The Government were to inform the Court, by 11 June 2021 at the latest, of the measures taken and of any treatment provided, and to submit a plan for future inpatient and/or outpatient treatment.
174.  The Court notes that the applicant was not transferred to a prison medical facility as an inpatient by 11 June 2021 and no comprehensive medical examination had been carried out. Accordingly, the interim measures indicated on 7 May 2021 were not complied with.
175.  The Government argued that this was due to the applicant’s own conduct, namely his refusal to be transferred to the MMD Hospital. The Court will therefore examine whether there was an objective impediment to compliance.
176.  At the outset, the Court notes that, for the first five days after the Court’s decision of 7 May 2021, it appears that no steps were taken by the Government in order to comply with the measures indicated and instead on 12 May 2021 the Government wrote to the Court contesting in strong terms the necessity of the measures indicated by the Court and requesting that the measures be lifted, that request eventually being rejected by the Court. Accordingly, it is apparent that initially it was not shown that there were any objective impediments to compliance with the measures and that at that stage the Government were not complying because they disagreed with the Court that there had been a real risk of immediate and irreparable damage to the applicant when the interim measure had been indicated. Furthermore, it has also not been demonstrated that any steps were taken to comply with the measures indicated until the Court’s formal decision to reject the Government’s request to lift the measures. The Court reiterates in this regard that it is not open to a Contracting State to substitute its own judgment for that of the Court in verifying whether there were grounds for indicating the interim measure (see paragraph 170 above). Rather, it must demonstrate to the Court that the interim measure was complied with or, in an exceptional case, that there was an objective impediment which prevented compliance and that the Government took all reasonable steps to remove the impediment and to keep the Court informed about the situation (see Paladi, cited above, § 92).
177.  As to the applicant’s conduct – and the parties disagreed whether the applicant actually refused the steps taken by the authorities to comply with the measures – the Court considers that it has not been demonstrated that this was a serious and objective impediment to compliance with the interim measures. In this regard, it firstly refers to its assessment of this situation above (see paragraph 106 above) and observes that, by the time of the applicant’s letter of 22 May 2021, around two weeks had already passed since the indication of the interim measures to the Government and the applicant had still not been transferred to a prison medical facility. As it has already found above, the Court considers that the applicant was merely insisting that he should be transferred to the MMD Hospital as an inpatient, in compliance with the Court’s decision of 7 May 2021, rather than refusing medical assistance altogether. Secondly, the Court observes that the Government did not inform the Court about the applicant’s alleged refusal (which, according to the Government, had taken place on 22 May and then again on 24 May 2021) and did not comment on it at all until 11 June 2021 (see paragraph 54 above). In fact, it was the applicant himself who on 26 May 2021 first informed the Court about his correspondence with the authorities of 22 May 2021, and his letter was forwarded by the Court to the Government who, as noted above, did not comment on it until 11 June 2021, the deadline set by the Court for information to be provided on the measures taken. In such circumstances, the Court considers that noncompliance with the first decision on interim measures, which the Government were requested to ensure was executed “at the earliest possible date”, cannot have been attributable (or not solely attributable) to the applicant’s conduct and that the Government failed to inform the Court of any possible impediments in a timely manner.
178.  Following the above, and after seeking further clarifications from the applicant, on 22 June 2021 the Court took a further decision on interim measures, essentially reiterating the previous indication but with the difference that the Government were asked to ensure the applicant’s “immediate transfer” to the prison medical facility and the applicant was asked to duly submit to the steps taken by the authorities with a view to implementation of the measures indicated. Following this, the applicant was transferred to the MMD Hospital on 2 July 2021, ten days after the Court’s second decision of 22 June 2021, and the medical examinations and interventions as described above were carried out.
179.  Accordingly, the Court notes that the authorities eventually complied with the above-mentioned interim measures indicated in the Court’s second decision. It then remains to be determined whether the Government complied with the interim measures within a reasonable time. It observes in this regard that the applicant was transferred to the MMD Hospital with a delay of ten days. Given the earlier developments, namely that the measures indicated on 7 May 2021 had not been complied with, and that the measures indicated on 22 June 2021 were essentially the same, except that the applicant’s “immediate transfer” was required, the Court observes straight away that such a delay appears very long in itself.
180.  The Court must therefore verify whether such a delay in the application of the interim measure was justified by any exceptional circumstances. However, again, it notes that the Government had not informed the Court of any such exceptional circumstances or impediments.
181.  On 17 November 2021 the Court decided to continue to apply Rule 39 of the Rules of Court, with modified interim measures. In particular, it was indicated to the Government to ensure that the applicant was provided with any necessary and adequate medical treatment in detention, whether on an outpatient or inpatient basis, as considered appropriate by qualified doctors. The Government were also asked to inform the Court periodically, starting with an initial deadline of 19 January 2022, and every three months thereafter, of the applicant’s state of health and the medical treatment provided, if he remained in detention.
182.  The Government submitted five periodic reports in total, of which four were late and two were very late. The first report was submitted with a delay of over a month (see paragraph 74 above), and the second report with a delay of over two weeks (see paragraph 77 above), in both cases after reminders from the Court. Again, the Government had not promptly informed the Court of any impediments causing any of these delays.
183.  Having regard to the above, the Court considers that the Azerbaijani authorities failed to comply with the interim measures indicated on 7 May 2021 without showing any objective impediments preventing compliance, and that there were excessively long delays in complying with the interim measures subsequently indicated on 22 June and 17 November 2021 which were similarly not objectively justified. This is sufficient to conclude that the authorities did not fulfil their obligations under Article 34 of the Convention. In view of this finding, it is not necessary to further examine the applicant’s arguments that the Government also failed at various times to submit complete information or plans of future medical treatment as indicated by the Court.
184.  The Court therefore finds that the respondent State has failed to comply with its obligations under Article 34 of the Convention.
APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
185.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
Damage
186.  The applicant claimed 50,000 euros (EUR) in respect of nonpecuniary damage.
187.  The Government submitted that the claim was excessive and that a finding of a violation would constitute just satisfaction in itself.
188.  The Court awards the applicant EUR 6,000 in respect of nonpecuniary damage, plus any tax that may be chargeable.
Costs and expenses
189.  The applicant also claimed EUR 4,234 for the costs and expenses incurred before the domestic courts and before the Court, including EUR 1,000 for the legal fees of Mr E. Abbasov, EUR 3,000 for the legal fees of Mr J. Javadov, and EUR 234 for postal expenses. The applicant asked for any award in respect of costs and expenses to be paid directly to the representatives’ bank accounts.
190.  The Government submitted that the amounts in respect of legal fees were excessive and had not been actually paid by the applicant to the lawyers.
191.  According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that these were actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to quantum. In the present case, regard being had to the documents in its possession and the above criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award the sum of EUR 3,234 covering costs under all heads (including legal costs for both representatives), plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applicant, to be paid directly to his principal representative, Mr J. Javadov, to be subsequently divided between the representatives themselves as they consider appropriate.
