INTRODUCTION
1.  The case concerns an alleged violation of the presumption of innocence during compensation proceedings brought against the State by the applicant following the discontinuation of criminal proceedings against him as being time-barred (Article 6 § 2 of the Convention).
THE FACTS
2.  The applicant was born in 1954 and lives in Roztoky. He was represented by Mr R. Jelínek, a lawyer practising in Prague.
3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr P. Konůpka, of the Ministry of Justice.
4.  The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE APPLICANT
5.  In January 2003 criminal proceedings were opened against the applicant, who was charged with fraud, in connection with actions he had committed in his capacity as a bank manager in 1993 and 1994 (known in the Czech Republic as the “Hsystem” case). In December 2004 he was formally indicted for that offence by the prosecutor and tried by the Prague Municipal Court (hereinafter “the criminal court” or “the court”). Since the subjective element of fraud – that is, the fact that the applicant’s actions had been wilful and premeditated – could not be established, the criminal court changed the legal classification of the offence to mismanagement of another’s property.
6.  In its decision of 9 January 2009 the criminal court observed that the facts established “allowed for the conclusion that the applicant (together with other persons) had committed the offence of mismanagement of another’s property”. However, since the five-year limitation period for that offence had expired before the applicant had been charged, and since the evidence available was not sufficient for his actions to be characterised as fraud, for which the Criminal Code set a ten-year limitation period, the court discontinued the criminal proceedings as being time-barred.
7.  The prosecutor appealed against that decision and it was quashed on 4 November 2009. The case was remitted to the criminal court, which on 23 July 2010 again decided that the criminal proceedings against the applicant had to be discontinued as being time-barred. After referring to the above statements made in its decision of 9 January 2009, which it repeated on pages 100-01 of its decision of 23 July 2010, the criminal court went on to re-examine whether the applicant could be prosecuted for fraud, and concluded that he could not. That was because the prosecutor’s assertions that the applicant had since the beginning acted with fraudulent intent and agreed with other perpetrators on the means of carrying out the fraud could not be proved. The court noted, on pages 137 and 141 of its decision, that the applicant’s actions could only be characterised as mismanagement of another’s property, in respect of which the five-year limitation period had expired before the charges had been brought against him.
8.  The applicant was instructed that if he declared, within three days from the notification of the decision of 23 July 2010, that he insisted on the case being examined, the criminal proceedings against him would be pursued. This procedure involves a person requesting that an examination of the criminal charges be continued notwithstanding that they have been found to be time-barred. If such a request is made, the proceedings continue and a conclusion on guilt or innocence is reached (Article 11 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; see paragraph 20 below). The applicant did not make use of that possibility. An appeal by the prosecutor against the court’s decision was dismissed by a higher court on 9 March 2011.
COMPENSATION PROCEEDINGS UNDER THE STATE LIABILITY ACT
9.  In October 2011 the applicant lodged a claim under section 14 of the State Liability Act (Law no. 82/1998) with the Ministry of Justice, seeking compensation for the legal expenses he had incurred in the above-mentioned criminal proceedings and for related loss of income.
10.  In April 2012 the Ministry found the claim to be unfounded, given that the statutory requirement of a decision which had been quashed or changed on the grounds of its unlawfulness had not been satisfied in the present case. Nor had the applicant been in a situation which, according to judicial practice, amounted to an unlawful decision on bringing charges, meaning a situation where the criminal prosecution had been discontinued on grounds other than those mentioned in section 12 of the State Liability Act, namely because the accused had not perpetrated the alleged actions, or where he or she had been acquitted, and was thus to be regarded as not having committed the offence. In the present case, however, the applicant’s prosecution had been discontinued as time-barred rather than because he had not committed the actions in respect of which the prosecution had been brought. It was also to be noted that the applicant had not asked to have the criminal proceedings against him pursued, thus depriving himself of the possibility of being acquitted, which would have rendered his prosecution unlawful.
11.  On 21 May 2012 the applicant lodged a claim for compensation with the Prague 2 District Court, emphasising that he had been prosecuted for the offence of fraud, which had not been proved, and that his guilt had not been established by any court decision.
12.  On 27 November 2013 the District Court dismissed the applicant’s action. Accepting that his criminal prosecution had not led to a final conviction, which was why the decision to bring that prosecution could be formally regarded as having been quashed on account of its unlawfulness, the court considered, referring to the “clear” statements made by the criminal court on pages 100-01 and 141 of its decision of 23 July 2010 (see paragraph 7 above), that although the applicant’s criminal prosecution had been discontinued as being time-barred, there was no doubt that he had committed an act fulfilling the constituent elements of the offence of mismanagement of another’s property. In that context, the civil court referred to a judgment of 17 September 2012 in which the Supreme Court had held that, while the expiry of the limitation period meant the extinction of a perpetrator’s criminal liability given that the need for a criminal-law response to an offence progressively attenuated over time, that circumstance could not have any bearing on the fact that a specified person had committed a legally reprehensible act. In such a situation the Supreme Court had considered it appropriate to apply section 12(1)(b) of the State Liability Act, pursuant to which compensation could not be granted to a person whose criminal prosecution had been discontinued on the ground that he or she was not criminally liable for the offence committed. Indeed, the passage of time could not imply that a person who had, according to the findings of the criminal proceedings, committed an offence should be considered a person whose conduct was free from any unlawfulness and who should be compensated for having been prosecuted.
13.  The applicant appealed, challenging the civil court’s extensive interpretation of section 12 of the State Liability Act, which had de facto created a new ground for denying compensation. He was of the view that to be able to state that he had committed the offence of mismanagement of another’s property, the civil court would have been obliged, at the very least, to rehear all the evidence taken by the criminal court.
14.  On 28 April 2014 the Prague Municipal Court upheld the judgment of 27 November 2013, endorsing the conclusion that section 12 of the State Liability Act should be applied per analogiam, as the mere fact that the limitation period had expired did not imply that the decision to bring the prosecution had been unlawful. The court also observed that the applicant had not sought to have the criminal proceedings against him continued and the question of guilt determined, which would have allowed him, in the event of an acquittal, to seek compensation. Since he had not availed himself of that possibility, it could only be inferred per analogiam from section 12(1)(b) of the State Liability Act that he had no right to compensation on account of his criminal prosecution having been discontinued as time-barred. Indeed, if the applicant had insisted on the continuation of the criminal proceedings, he would have had an opportunity to prove (for example, by means of a decision to acquit him) that the decision to bring the prosecution had been unlawful. Such a conclusion could be reached even without reference to the reasoning of the criminal court’s decision of 23 July 2010, in which that court had held that the applicant had committed the offence of mismanagement of another’s property. In that respect, the Municipal Court agreed with the applicant’s objection that, while the civil court would have been bound by a decision by the competent authorities that an offence had been committed, in the present case there had been no such decision as to his guilt and punishment.
15.  The applicant lodged an appeal on points of law challenging the Municipal Court’s interpretation according to which there could have been an “unlawful decision” only if he had asked for the criminal proceedings against him to be continued and obtained a decision in his favour (such as an acquittal). In his view, the unlawfulness of the decision to bring the prosecution stemmed from the very fact that that decision had been taken after the expiry of the limitation period. Even if he had insisted on the continuation of the criminal proceedings and obtained an acquittal, the initial decision to open the prosecution would not have been quashed.
16.  On 11 February 2015 the Supreme Court rejected the applicant’s appeal on points of law as being inadmissible. It observed that under the State Liability Act, compensation could be granted to a person whose criminal prosecution had been discontinued on the grounds that he or she had not committed the offence (typically, as provided by Article 172 § 1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, (a) when there was no doubt that the act had not occurred, (b) when the act did not constitute an offence, or (c) when it was not established that the act had been committed by the prosecuted person). On the other hand, in cases where a criminal prosecution was discontinued with the opposite conclusion, namely that the prosecuted person had committed a reprehensible act amounting to a criminal offence, the award of compensation was excluded by section 12(2)(b) and (c) of the State Liability Act on the basis that to do so would be contrary to good morals. In the Supreme Court’s view, it was not relevant in that respect whether there had been any change in legal classification because the impugned act remained the same in any case and any compensation claim could only be linked to the act for which the person had been prosecuted. The fundamental issue underlying those conclusions was again the fact that the act committed by the person had constituted an offence. In the present case, the criminal court had stated in its discontinuation decision that the applicant had committed an offence; only a judgment acquitting him (and not the mere fact that the accused had insisted on the continuation of the criminal proceedings) would have been capable of demonstrating the contrary. Lastly, the Supreme Court found that the appeal on points of law could not be allowed on account of the applicant’s complaint relating to the presumption of innocence: while, admittedly, he had not been convicted by a final decision, the criminal court had stated that he had committed an act fulfilling the constituent elements of the offence.
17.  The applicant subsequently lodged a constitutional appeal against the decision of the Supreme Court, in which he complained, inter alia, of a violation of the principle of presumption of innocence and the per analogiam interpretation of the State Liability Act in his case. In his view, it followed from the criminal court’s decision on the discontinuation of the proceedings that it had established that he had not committed the offence of fraud for which he had been prosecuted. In such a situation, having been unlawfully prosecuted for eight years, he could not have been expected to seek the continuation of the proceedings. The applicant also complained that the civil courts dealing with his compensation claim had rejected his proposal to rehear all the evidence previously taken by the criminal court and that, apart from the decision of 23 July 2010, they had not examined any evidence as to their assertion that he had committed the offence of mismanagement of another’s property.
18.  In its decision of 19 January 2016, the Constitutional Court dismissed the applicant’s constitutional appeal as manifestly ill-founded (III. ÚS 1391/15). Observing that civil courts were bound only by the operative part of a criminal court’s judgment convicting a defendant but not by its reasoning or by a decision on the discontinuation of a criminal prosecution, it noted nonetheless that the courts dealing with the applicant’s compensation claim had been fully competent to examine the matters covered by the reasoning of the criminal courts’ decisions, the applicant’s actions and their impact on the compensation proceedings. In so doing they had taken into account the reasoning of the criminal court’s decision on discontinuation, which was based on ample evidence and free from arbitrariness, but had not assessed the facts underlying the conclusion on the applicant’s guilt. That, admittedly, could not be considered to have constituted a thorough review but was not sufficient to justify the quashing of their decisions.
Furthermore, the Constitutional Court accepted the application per analogiam of section 12 of the State Liability Act, which relied on the previous practice of the Supreme Court, and endorsed the conclusion according to which compensation for damage caused by a criminal prosecution could not be granted to a person who had been prosecuted for an act amounting to an offence which had lost its criminal character owing to statutory limitation. It observed that the fact that the initial legal characterisation of an act had not been confirmed did not render the criminal prosecution unlawful since the perpetrator could still be convicted for the same act but under a different provision of the Criminal Code; nor did the criminal prosecution become unlawful because the perpetrator could no longer be convicted, since he or she had still committed the act giving rise to that prosecution.
Lastly, the Constitutional Court found that, considered together, the criminal courts’ decisions of 23 July 2010 and 9 March 2011 and their extensive reasoning offered a sufficient basis to conclude that the applicant had committed the offence of mismanagement of another’s property, releasing the civil courts from the obligation to take more evidence. That was all the more so since the burden of proof in the compensation proceedings had lain with the applicant; however, it did not appear from the file that he had challenged the findings of fact made by the criminal courts.
Thus, the civil courts’ conclusion, based on the criminal courts’ decisions, that the applicant had committed an act contrary to the Criminal Code had constituted, in the specific circumstances of the case at issue, a legitimate reason for not granting the compensation sought.
RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND PRACTICE
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE
19.  Under Article 135 of the Code of Civil Procedure, a civil court is bound by a decision by the competent authorities that an offence has been committed and by their conclusions as to who committed it; as to other questions which should be dealt with by another authority, the court is allowed to assess them but should base its assessment on a decision by the competent authority if such a decision exists.
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
20.  Under Article 11 § 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as in force at the material time, criminal prosecution which has been discontinued as being time-barred shall be pursued if the person charged stated, within three days following the notification of the discontinuation decision, that he or she insisted on the case being examined.
STATE LIABILITY ACT (LAW NO. 82/1998)
21.  Section 12(1) of the State Liability Act provides that there is no entitlement to compensation for damage caused by a criminal decision in the case of (a) a person who has caused his or her own detention or conviction, or the imposition of a protective measure, or (b) a person who has been acquitted or whose prosecution has been discontinued solely because he or she is not criminally liable for the offence committed.
Under Section 12(2) there is no entitlement to compensation for damage in the case when (a) it was not possible to pursue the proceedings for the reasons provided by a special law, (b) criminal prosecution had been conditionally discontinued and the discontinuation became effective, (c) the decision on discontinuation of criminal prosecution was part of a settlement agreement, and (d) criminal prosecution was discontinued for the reasons provided by a special law.
DOMESTIC COURTS’ PRACTICE
22.  The Government submitted examples of domestic case-law (for example, judgment of the Prague Municipal Court no. 30 Co 566/2010 of 25 January 2011), according to which a prosecuted person is not entitled to compensation for an unlawful decision where the prosecution has been discontinued but where it has been simultaneously established that the prosecuted person engaged in conduct constituting a criminal offence. That can occur when the prosecution is discontinued as being time-barred while at the same time it has been reliably established that, but for the expiry of the limitation period, the person concerned could have been convicted and punished. In such cases, section 12 of the State Liability Act should apply mutatis mutandis.
23.  In its judgments no. 28 Cdo 605/2012 of 17 September 2012 and no. 30 Cdo 408/2013 of 28 January 2014, the Supreme Court found that it would be inappropriate to grant a right to compensation in cases where a criminal offence had been committed and the fact that the perpetrator had not been convicted of that offence was based on conditions objectively laid down by law. If there was no doubt that the person concerned had indeed committed an act amounting to a criminal offence but the offence had ceased to be punishable, then clearly this was a situation contemplated by the provisions of section 12 of the State Liability Act, which was intended to exclude the right to compensation for damage caused by a prosecution whose outcome had not established that the person prosecuted had not committed an act classified by law as a criminal offence. If the right to compensation were to be granted in such a case although, according to the conclusions reached in the criminal proceedings, the person prosecuted had indeed committed an unlawful act constituting a criminal offence, that would be at odds with the principle of ex injuria jus non oritur (no law arises from an illegal act).
