THE LAW
I.  PRELIMINARY QUESTION
17.  As a preliminary point, the Court takes note of the death of Mr Lajos Erményi on 6 January 2015 and of the wish expressed by his heirs, namely, his widow and his children, to continue the application before the Court in his stead (see paragraph 3 above). In accordance with its case-law and considering that the present application involves an important question of general interest, namely, the compatibility with the Convention of the dismissal of the Vice-President of a high national court, the Court finds that the heirs have standing to continue the application in the applicant’s stead (see, for instance and mutatis mutandis, Karner v. Austria, no. 40016/98, §§ 25-26, ECHR 2003-IX; Koryak v. Russia, no. 24677/10, § 68, 13 November 2012; and Romankevič v. Lithuania, no. 25747/07, § 16, 2 December 2014).
II.  ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE CONVENTION
18.  The applicant complained that he had been dismissed from his position of Vice-President, three years and ten months before the statutory date of his term’s expiry, by means of an ad hominem legislative measure. In the initial application of 20 June 2012 he invoked Articles 6, 13 and 14 of the Convention, as well as Article 1 of Protocol No. 1, and contended, in particular, that his dismissal had ruined his career and reputation as well as his social and professional relationships and had also resulted in his unjustified deprivation of the peaceful enjoyment of the benefits that would have been due to him during his term of office. In a memorial summarising his arguments following the disjoinder, on 19 March 2014, of the present complaint from the initial application (see paragraph 1 above), the applicant also invoked Article 8 of the Convention and explicitly argued that the termination of his mandate had violated his right to respect for private life, including the development of relationships of a professional nature.
19.  The Court reiterates that since it is master of the characterisation to be given in law to the facts of the case, it does not consider itself bound by the characterisation given by an applicant or a government. By virtue of the jura novit curia principle, it has, for example, considered of its own motion complaints under Articles or paragraphs not relied on by those appearing before it. A complaint is characterised by the matters alleged in it and not merely by the legal grounds or arguments relied on (see, mutatis mutandis, Powell and Rayner v. the United Kingdom, judgment of 21 February 1990, Series A no. 172, § 29; Guerra and Others v. Italy, judgment of 19 February 1998, Reports 1998-I, § 44; Berktay v. Turkey, no. 22493/93, § 167, 1 March 2001; Eugenia Lazăr v. Romania, no. 32146/05, § 60, 16 February 2010; and Samachișă v. Romania, no. 57467/10, § 43, 16 July 2015). Having regard to the facts of the present application, the Court considers it appropriate to examine the applicant’s complaint solely from the standpoint of Article 8 of the Convention, which, in so far as relevant, provides:
“1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his private ... life ... .
2.  There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”
A.  The parties’ submissions
1.  The Government
20.  The Government raised preliminary objections relating, on one hand, to the applicant’s loss of victim status and, on the other hand, to his failure to exhaust domestic remedies, as required by Article 35 § 1 of the Convention.
21.  As regards the first objection, the Government argued that the applicant’s complaint was incompatible ratione personae with the provisions of the Convention, since on the strength of his having accepted lump-sum compensation for his dismissal he had ceased to have victim status within the meaning of Article 34 of the Convention.
22.  As regards the second objection, they contended that the applicant had not exhausted an available domestic remedy, namely an action for damages, as referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16 above, which could have provided full compensation in respect of any of his claims that might remain after the disbursement of the lump-sum compensation.
23.  Concerning the merits of the case, the Government acknowledged that the impugned measures constituted an interference with the applicant’s rights, as guaranteed by Article 8 of the Convention. They nevertheless argued that the interference had been prescribed by law and had formed part of a series of measures aimed at eliminating certain anomalies in the Hungarian pension system with a view to creating a fair scheme that would apply to all categories of public servants in a uniform manner. They further submitted that the interference had been necessary following the full-scale reorganisation of the justice system in 2012, which had significantly modified the legal position of the President of the Supreme Court and that of his deputy. In their view, the interference was not disproportionate, taking into account the generous reparations stipulated by Act no. XX of 2013 (see paragraph 13 above).
2.  The applicant
24.  The applicant argued that given that he had brought the substance of his complaint before the Constitutional Court, the domestic authorities had been afforded an opportunity to provide redress for the interference he had been subject to. He had thus duly exhausted the available domestic remedies and was not required to pursue other legal avenues. He also stressed that the Kúria’s judgment referred to in paragraph 16 above had concerned a judge’s dismissal from his post as a judge, a subject matter entirely different from the subject of his complaint.
Similarly, the lump-sum compensation he had received related to the termination of his judicial service, pursuant to the amended rules on judges’ mandatory retirement age. Therefore, the fact that he had received such compensation could not deprive him of his status as the victim of another interference, namely his dismissal from his position as Vice-President.
25.  In the applicant’s view, the legislative measure terminating his mandate as Vice-President had not met the requirements of foreseeability and compatibility and the principle of the rule of law. Nor had it been based on a legitimate aim or been necessary in a democratic society. He argued, in particular, that the legal provision applied to him, although couched in terms of a legislative act, was nothing less than an individual decision on his dismissal. He also contended that two of the judges who had voted in favour of the Constitutional Court’s judgment dismissing his constitutional complaint should have been excluded from adjudicating on the case on account of the fact that, as former members of parliament, they had previously taken part in the preparation of the legislative measure under the Constitutional Court’s scrutiny.
B.  The Court’s assessment
1.  Admissibility
26.  At the outset, the Court finds it important to note the difference between the legal basis for the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President (section 185 (1) of the AOAC – see paragraph 9 above, as well as Baka, cited above, §§ 30 and 50) – and for the applicant’s subsequent release from his duties as a judge under section 90 (ha) of the ALSRJ (see paragraph 11 above, as well as Baka, cited above, § 52).
27.  The Court considers that both the reparatory scheme (including the lump-sum compensation referred to by the Government – see paragraph 21 above) and the legal avenue allegedly providing a remedy based on the objective liability of a judge’s employer (cited in paragraph 22 above) were related to judges’ dismissals from judicial service on account of their age pursuant to section 90 (ha) of the ALSRJ, which had been found unconstitutional and unlawful.
28.  As regards the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President – the issue before the Court in the present case – the Government did not demonstrate that, apart from the constitutional complaint that he had lodged (to no avail), any form of remedy had been available to the applicant or could have deprived him of his status as a victim for the purposes of Article 34 of the Convention. In particular, the Government failed to show how an action for damages, without a preliminary finding of unconstitutionality or unlawfulness in respect of the applicant’s dismissal, could have been successful in the light of the domestic case-law, according to which damage potentially resulting from legislation does not create a relationship of civil-law liability between the lawmaker and the alleged victim (see Vékony v. Hungary, no. 65681/13, § 17, 13 January 2015).
Therefore, the Government’s preliminary objections as to the applicant’s loss of victim status and non-exhaustion of domestic remedies must be dismissed.
29.  The Court notes that the complaint is not manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention. It further notes that it is not inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
2.  Merits
(a)  Whether there has been an interference
30.  The notion of “private life” within the meaning of Article 8 of the Convention encompasses the right for an individual to form and develop relationships with other human beings, including relationships of a professional or business nature. Article 8 thus protects the right to personal development and the right to establish and develop relationships with other human beings and the outside world and does not exclude in principle activities of a professional or business nature because it is in the course of their working lives that the majority of people have a significant opportunity to develop relationships with the outside world (see Oleksandr Volkov v. Ukraine, no. 21722/11, § 165, ECHR 2013-I, with further references). Dismissal from office has been found to interfere with the right to respect for private life (see Özpınar v. Turkey, no. 20999/04, §§ 43-48, 19 October 2010).
31.  In the present case, it was not in dispute between the parties that the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President constituted an interference with his right to respect for his private life. The Court finds no reason to hold otherwise.
It remains to be examined whether that interference was justified under Article 8 § 2.
(b)  Whether the interference was justified
(i)  Lawfulness
32.  The expression “in accordance with the law” requires, firstly, that the impugned measure should have some basis in domestic law. Secondly, it refers to the quality of the law in question, requiring that it should be accessible to the person concerned, who must moreover be able to foresee its consequences for him, and be compatible with the rule of law (see, among other authorities, Kopp v. Switzerland, 25 March 1998, § 55, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998-II). This latter concept, which is expressly mentioned in the Preamble to the Convention and is inherent in all the Articles of the Convention, requires, inter alia, that any interference must in principle be based on an instrument of general application (see, in relation to Articles 6 § 1 and 10 of the Convention, Baka, cited above, §§ 117 and 154).
33.  Although the applicant argued that the individualised manner in which the provision terminating his mandate had been phrased had violated the requirements of the rule of law (see paragraph 25 above), the Court will nevertheless proceed on the assumption that the interference was “in accordance with the law” for the purposes of Article 8 § 2, as in any event the impugned interference breaches Article 8 for other reasons.
(ii)  Legitimate aim
34.  The Court reiterates that the enumeration of the exceptions to the individual’s right to respect for his private life, as listed in Article 8 § 2, is exhaustive and that their definition is restrictive. For it to be compatible with the Convention, a limitation of this freedom must, in particular, pursue an aim that can be linked to one of those listed in this provision (Parrillo v. Italy [GC], no. 46470/11, § 163, ECHR 2015).
35.  The Government submitted that the termination of the applicant’s judicial status was aimed at eliminating certain anomalies in the Hungarian pension system – a consideration which may obviously be linked to the aim of protecting “the economic well-being of the country” (see paragraph 23 above). However, the Court reiterates that the interference which it is called to examine in the present case is the applicant’s dismissal from his position as Vice-President, rather than his release from his duties as a judge altogether.
As regards the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President, the Government only referred to the full-scale reorganisation of the justice system, which had allegedly rendered the impugned measure inevitable. However, they did not demonstrate any link between the applicant’s dismissal from his position and the aims exhaustively listed in Article 8 § 2.
36.  Furthermore, the Court already held that the alleged changes in the competences of the supreme judicial body did not appear to be of such a fundamental nature that they could or should have prompted the premature termination of its President’s mandate (see Baka, cited above, § 150). The same necessarily holds true for the applicant in the present case, whose dismissal was a corollary to that of the Supreme Court’s President (see paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Constitutional Court’s judgment no. 3076/2013. (III. 27.) AB of 19 March 2013, quoted in Baka, cited above, § 55).
37.  It follows that the Court cannot accept that the interference complained of pursued any of the legitimate aims enumerated in Article 8 § 2.
38.  Where it has been shown that an interference did not pursue a “legitimate aim” it is not necessary to investigate whether it was “necessary in a democratic society” (see, for instance and mutatis mutandis, Khuzhin and Others v. Russia, no. 13470/02, §§ 117-118, 23 October 2008).
Nor does the Court find it necessary to examine the applicant’s allegations as to the unlawful participation of certain judges in the adjudication of his case before the Constitutional Court (see paragraph 25 above).
(iii)  Conclusion
39.  The foregoing considerations are sufficient to enable the Court to conclude that the termination of the applicant’s mandate as Vice-President of the Supreme Court did not meet the requirements of Article 8 § 2 of the Convention.
40.  There has therefore been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention.
III.  APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
41.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
A.  Damage
42.  The applicant claimed that as a result of the premature termination of his mandate as Vice-President he had lost his salary and other benefits attached to that position. He provided a detailed calculation of his claim for pecuniary damage, which amounted to 106,900 euros (EUR).
43.  The applicant also claimed that as a consequence of the premature termination of his mandate, his professional career and reputation had been damaged and he had suffered considerable frustration. He sought an award of just satisfaction in respect of non-pecuniary damage in the amount of EUR 90,000.
44.  The Government found those claims excessive.
45.  Without speculating on the exact amount of the salary and the benefits which the applicant would have received if the violation of the Convention had not occurred and if he had been able to remain in the post of Vice-President of the Supreme Court until the end of his term, the Court observes that the applicant incurred pecuniary loss. It also considers that the applicant must have sustained non-pecuniary damage which the finding of a violation of the Convention in this judgment does not suffice to remedy. Making an assessment on the basis of equity and in the light of all the information in its possession, the Court considers it reasonable to award the applicant an aggregate sum of EUR 20,000 for all heads of damage combined, plus any tax that may be chargeable on that amount (see, mutatis mutandis, Baka, cited above, § 191).
B.  Costs and expenses
46.  The applicant also claimed EUR 11,315 for the costs and expenses incurred before the Court. This sum corresponds to 51 hours of legal work, charged at an hourly rate of EUR 190, and 25 hours of paralegal work, charged at an hourly rate of EUR 65, to be billed by his lawyer.
47.  The Government contested this claim.
48.  According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that these have been actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to quantum. In the present case, regard being had to the documents in its possession and the above criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award the sum of EUR 5,000 for the costs and expenses incurred before it.
C.  Default interest
49.  The Court considers it appropriate that the default interest rate should be based on the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank, to which should be added three percentage points.
