THE LAW
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 10 OF THE CONVENTION
21.  The applicant complained of a restriction of his right to freedom of expression on account of the disciplinary sanction imposed on him. He relied on Article 10 of the Convention, which reads as follows:
“1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority ...
2.  The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society, ... for the protection of health ..., for the protection of the reputation or rights of others ...”
Admissibility
22.  The Government did not raise any objection as to the admissibility of the application.
23.  The Court notes that the application is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
The applicant
24.  The applicant submitted that the domestic courts had failed to recognise that the legal requirements for a disciplinary offence under section 136(1)(1) and (2) of the Medical Practitioners Act (see paragraph 16 above) had not been met. Furthermore, these provisions, as well as section 53 of the Medical Practitioners Act, read in conjunction with paragraph 2 of the Regulation on Medical Practitioners and the Public were not applicable to the present circumstances because articles and statements posted on a doctor’s website could not be regarded as advertising by a doctor. Only a measure capable of attracting new patients for treatment could be regarded as advertising. There had consequently been an unconceivable (denkunmöglich) application of the law.
25.  The applicant further maintained that the right to freedom of expression also protected stressing a specific aspect related to vaccinations, namely their risks. If every doctor had to remain within the inflexible boundaries of conventional medicine in all of his or her public statements, any diversity of opinion concerning alternative medical treatment options would be lost and a significant part of the population would not consult a doctor. The exercise of his right to freedom of expression therefore served the legitimate interests of the general public, namely the part of the population interested in alternative treatment options. Even if the impugned statements on his website were not in line with conventional medical science, or could have been perceived as offensive, shocking or disturbing by the State or part of the population, there were a number of scientific publications supporting the content. They were therefore justifiable and could not lead to disciplinary measures, at least in so far as they did not damage the reputation of the medical profession and did not breach professional duties if they had not been made in the exercise of his profession.
26.  The applicant agreed that within a democratic society, it was reasonable to impose special obligations (and restrictions) on doctors and medical professionals due to their position as medical advisers. Such obligations were suitable for establishing a solid relationship of trust between doctors and their patients. Restrictions of the right to freedom of expression could be proportionate to the legitimate aim of preventing other individuals from being restricted in their own right to freedom of expression. In the present case, however, there had been no such legitimate purpose, nor had the restriction of his right to freedom of expression been proportionate.
The Government
27.  The Government admitted that the disciplinary sanction in question had constituted an interference with the applicant’s right to freedom of expression which had however been justified under Article 10 § 2 of the Convention. Disciplinary sanctions under section 139(1) of the Medical Practitioners Act (see paragraph 17 above) could only be imposed under strict conditions which, according to the case-law of the Supreme Administrative Court (see paragraphs 19-20 above), had to be interpreted narrowly in view of the Convention guarantees. The relevant provisions referred to in the applicant’s case (see paragraphs 15-16 and 18 above) did not restrict doctors from participating in public debates on health policy issues in their professional capacity and from voicing criticism, provided that they declared this to be a minority opinion, where appropriate, and referred to information on contrasting opinions. The applicant’s statements on the website of his medical practice were not such objective criticism, but rather the dissemination of unobjective or unfounded information which had, inter alia, been provided for advertising purposes. Using section 136(1)(1) and (2) of the Medical Practitioners Act (see paragraph 16 above) as the legal basis for the disciplinary sanction had therefore been in line with domestic case-law.
28.  The Government further argued that the disciplinary sanction had pursued a legitimate aim under Article 10 § 2 of the Convention as it had been necessary for the protection of public health and in the interests of the general public so that they could be guided by objective considerations when seeking medical services. There was no doubt that there should be room for critical opinion on the issue of vaccination and for views other than those of conventional medicine. It was however necessary to set limits to purely onesided and medically clearly refuted allegations for the protection of public health and the reputation of the medical profession, which ensured the trust of the general public in medical practice and expertise.
29.  Lastly, the Government insisted that the interference had been proportionate. First, the applicant, in his statements, had challenged, among other things, vaccinations per se. The Court had however already held that there was a general consensus among the Contracting Parties, strongly supported by the specialised international bodies, that vaccination was one of the most successful and cost-effective health interventions and that each State should aim to achieve the highest possible level of vaccination among its population (reference was made to Vavřička and Others v. the Czech Republic [GC], nos. 47621/13 and 5 others, § 277, 8 April 2021). The interest in protecting public health clearly outweighed an individual’s right to disseminate unobjective or even wrong information, as in the present case, where a doctor, in connection with his professional practice, had disseminated information which had been proven to be untrue, presented in a nondifferentiating manner and liable to generally unsettle patients and the general public. Secondly, the disciplinary sanction had not been imposed because of the applicant’s statements as such, but because of their presentation on his website, which he had clearly been operating as a medical practitioner and had therefore been subject to the rules of conduct of the medical profession. Thirdly, in view of the prescribed scale of sanctions (see paragraph 17 above), the relatively low fine did not seem unreasonable, not least because the applicant had been granted a conditional suspension.
The Court’s assessment
General principles established in the Court’s case-law
On freedom of expression in general
30.  In order to determine whether Article 10 of the Convention was infringed it must first be ascertained whether the disputed measure amounted to an interference with the exercise of freedom of expression, in the form of a “formality, condition, restriction or penalty” (see Wille v. Liechtenstein [GC], no. 28396/95, § 43, ECHR 1999-VII). Such interference will breach the Convention if it fails to satisfy the criteria set out in the second paragraph of Article 10. The Court must therefore determine whether it was “prescribed by law”, whether it pursued one or more of the legitimate aims listed in that paragraph and whether it was “necessary in a democratic society” in order to achieve that aim or aims (see Lindon, Otchakovsky-Laurens and July v. France [GC], nos. 21279/02 and 36448/02, § 40, ECHR 2007-IV). A norm cannot be regarded as a “law” within the meaning of Article 10 § 2 unless it is formulated with sufficient precision to enable the citizen to regulate his conduct; he must be able – if need be with appropriate advice – to foresee, to a degree that is reasonable in the circumstances, the consequences which a given action may entail (ibid., § 41). The list of legitimate aims provided in paragraph 2 of Article 10 is exhaustive (see OOO Memo v. Russia, no. 2840/10, § 37, 15 March 2022).
31.  The basic principles concerning the necessity in a democratic society of interference with the exercise of freedom of expression are well established in the Court’s case-law and have been summarised as follows in, among other authorities, Hertel v. Switzerland (25 August 1998, § 46, Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1998VI) and Halet v. Luxembourg ([GC], no. 21884/18, § 110, 14 February 2023):
“Freedom of expression constitutes one of the essential foundations of a democratic society and one of the basic conditions for its progress and for each individual’s selffulfilment. Subject to paragraph 2 of Article 10, it is applicable not only to ‘information’ or ‘ideas’ that are favourably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter of indifference, but also to those that offend, shock or disturb. Such are the demands of pluralism, tolerance and broadmindedness without which there is no ‘democratic society’. As set forth in Article 10, this freedom is subject to exceptions, which ... must, however, be construed strictly, and the need for any restrictions must be established convincingly ...
The adjective ‘necessary’, within the meaning of Article 10 § 2, implies the existence of a ‘pressing social need’. In general, the ‘need’ for an interference with the exercise of the freedom of expression must be convincingly established. Admittedly, it is primarily for the national authorities to assess whether there is such a need capable of justifying that interference and, to that end, they enjoy a certain margin of appreciation. However, the margin of appreciation goes hand in hand with European supervision, embracing both the law and the decisions that apply it.
In exercising its supervisory jurisdiction, the Court must examine the interference in the light of the case as a whole, including the content of the impugned statements and the context in which they were made. In particular, it must determine whether the interference in issue was ‘proportionate to the legitimate aims pursued’ and whether the reasons adduced by the national authorities to justify it were ‘relevant and sufficient’. In doing so, the Court has to satisfy itself that these authorities applied standards which were in conformity with the principles embodied in Article 10 and that, moreover, they relied on an acceptable assessment of the relevant facts.”
On debates on public-health issues
32.  The Court has had occasion to examine disciplinary proceedings brought against a medical practitioner for alleged unethical conduct for writing an expert report critical of the treatment administered by other doctors. It held that medical practitioners also enjoyed a special relationship with patients based on trust, confidentiality and confidence that the former will use all available knowledge and means for ensuring the well-being of the latter. That could imply a need to preserve solidarity among members of the profession. The Court also held that a strict interpretation by the disciplinary courts of domestic law, as demonstrated in that case, as to ban any critical expression in the medical profession was not consonant with the right to freedom of expression. Such an approach risked discouraging medical practitioners from providing their patients with an objective view of their state of health and treatment received, which in turn could jeopardise the ultimate goal of the doctor’s profession, which was to protect the health and life of patients (see Frankowicz v. Poland, no. 53025/99, §§ 49 and 51, 16 December 2008).
33.  Even without any link to disciplinary proceedings brought against medical professionals, the Court has relied on the protection of health as a legitimate aim for restrictions of freedom of expression. For example, in the case of Hertel (cited above), the applicant had been prohibited, on pain of criminal penalties (imprisonment or a fine), from stating in particular that food prepared in microwave ovens was a danger to health and led to changes in the blood indicating a pathological disorder and presenting a pattern of the beginning of a carcinogenic process. The Court noted that the aim of the prohibition had been the “protection of the ... rights of others” and had concerned a debate affecting the general interest over public health, namely the effects of microwaves on human health). It observed that the applicant’s views had been expressed in less categorical terms and with no assertion that the consumption of irradiated food was harmful, but merely a suggestion that it could be. The periodical that had published extracts of the applicant’s research paper had a specific readership and therefore limited impact. Noting the disparity between the measure and the contested behaviour, the Court held that it created an imbalance in view of the scope of the injunction, which was partly to censor his work and to reduce his ability to publicly put forward views which had their place in a public debate. It mattered little that his opinion was a minority one and could appear to be devoid of merit since, in a sphere in which it was unlikely that any certainty existed, it would be particularly unreasonable to restrict freedom of expression only to generally accepted ideas. The Court concluded that the injunction could not be considered as “necessary in a democratic society” (see Hertel, cited above, §§ 31, 42 and 47-51).
34.  The case of Palusinski v. Poland ((dec.), no. 62414/00, 3 October 2006), on the other hand, concerned the applicant’s criminal conviction and sentence to fifteen months’ imprisonment, suspended for two years, and a fine of 2,000 Polish zlotys (PLN) for publishing a book inciting drug use and facilitating drug-taking by young people. The Court held that the book had offered very little if any information on the negative consequences of the use of substances like marijuana, LSD and magic mushrooms or on the possible risk of addiction. The book had also included “instructions on how to obtain ingredients and prepare them” and the “doses to be taken” and contained descriptions of “the states of mind which might be experienced” after taking them. The Court agreed that the book had been “designed to show that the narcotics described [brought] immediate pleasure and unforgettable experiences ... and, more importantly, that taking the doses suggested by the defendant ... [would] not have any negative consequences for life and health”. In the light of this, the Court considered that the authorities had given “relevant and sufficient” reasons for their decisions and that the suspended prison sentence and the fine could not be regarded as disproportionate. Given that the applicant had stood to gain financially by publishing the book, it had been reasonable to consider that a purely financial penalty would not have constituted a sufficient punishment or deterrent. The Court concluded that the interference complained of could be regarded as “necessary in a democratic society”.
35.  The case of Vérités Santé Pratique SARL v. France ((dec.), no. 74766/01, 1 December 2005), in turn, concerned the refusal to renew a registration certificate entitling its holder to tax relief and preferential postal rates. The applicant company had been publishing a health magazine with a critical approach to health matters and information on alternative types of treatment. The domestic authorities and courts based the refusal to renew the registration certification on the fact that the magazine disseminated unverified medical information which discredited the conventional treatment given to patients with serious illnesses such as cancer or hypertension. The Court, noting that the applicant company had been able to continue publishing under a different title and in a different medium, which reduced the scope of the interference complained of, held that the interference had pursued the legitimate aim of “protecting public health”, and indeed that of protecting the rights of others. It reiterated that Article 10 of the Convention did not guarantee unrestricted freedom of expression, and that the guarantee afforded journalists in respect of reporting on matters of general interest was subject to the condition that they acted in good faith so as to provide accurate and credible information in accordance with journalistic ethics; the same rule of law had to apply to other persons who engaged in public debate. In the case at hand, however, the domestic courts had found that the information disseminated by the applicant had not been validated by the current state of scientific knowledge. It was therefore of controversial quality. This was sufficient for the Court to consider the public-health grounds submitted by the authorities as pertinent and sufficient, to conclude that there had been a reasonable relationship of proportionality and that the complaint was manifestly ill-founded.
36.  Lastly, the two cases of Hachette Filipacchi Presse Automobile and Dupuy v. France (no. 13353/05, 5 March 2009) and Société de conception de presse et d’édition and Ponson v. France (no. 26935/05, 5 March 2009) concerned the fining of two publishing companies and their two publishing directors (EUR 30,000 and 20,000 respectively) for unlawful advertising of tobacco products. The Court held that the restriction of cigarette and tobaccorelated advertising was an essential part of a broader strategy in the fight against the social evil of smoking. Fundamental public-health considerations, on which legislation had been enacted in France and the European Union, could take precedence over economic imperatives, and even over certain fundamental rights such as freedom of expression. There was a European consensus on the need for strict regulation of tobacco advertising and a general trend towards such regulation worldwide. The Court did not have to take into account the actual impact on tobacco consumption of a ban on advertising. The fact that the impugned publications were regarded as capable of inciting people, particularly young people, to consume such products was a “relevant” and “sufficient” reason to justify the interference. Furthermore, while the amounts of the fines were certainly not negligible, in assessing whether they were harsh, they had to be compared with the revenue of highcirculation magazines such as those at issue. Given the importance of protecting public health, the pressing need to take steps to protect societies from the scourge of smoking and the existence of a consensus at European level on the prohibition of advertising of tobacco products, the restrictions imposed had answered a pressing social need and had not been disproportionate to the legitimate aim pursued (see Hachette Filipacchi Presse Automobile and Dupuy, §§ 46-48 and 51-52, and Société de conception de presse et d’édition and Ponson, §§ 56-58 and 62-63, both cited above).
Application of the above principles to the present case
37.  It is not in dispute between the parties that there has been an interference with the applicant’s right to freedom of expression within the meaning of Article 10 § 1 of the Convention. The Court sees no reason to disagree that the disciplinary sanction imposed on the applicant for certain statements made on his website amounted to an interference with his right to freedom of expression (see also Frankowicz, cited above, § 44). It remains to be seen whether the interference complained of was prescribed by law, pursued a legitimate aim and was necessary in a democratic society within the meaning of Article 10 § 2 of the Convention.
Lawfulness of the interference
38.  In so far as the applicant can be understood to be suggesting that the interference complained of was not lawful (given his argument that there was an unconceivable application of the law in paragraph 24 above), the Court notes that the domestic courts, in upholding the disciplinary sanction issued in respect of the applicant, relied on section 53 of the Medical Practitioners Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation on Medical Practitioners and the Public, and sections 136 and 139 of the Medical Practitioners Act (see paragraphs 10 and 14, as well as 15-18 above). These provisions were sufficiently precise, in view of the definitions contained in the Regulation on Medical Practitioners and the Public (see paragraph 18 above). The case-law of the Supreme Administrative Court that pre- and post-dated the applicant’s case confirms the consistent interpretation of these provisions in similar cases (see paragraphs 19-20 above). The Court finds nothing arbitrary or manifestly unreasonable in that interpretation of the relevant provisions and reiterates that it is first and foremost for the national authorities, and notably the courts, to interpret domestic law (see Cangı v. Turkey, no. 24973/15, § 42, 29 January 2019). It follows that the interference was “prescribed by law” within the meaning of the Convention.
Legitimacy of the aim pursued by the interference
39.  The Court notes that the aim pursued by the impugned measure, as established by the domestic courts, was the protection of health and that it was in the interests of the general public and the medical profession to be guided by objective considerations when using medical services (see paragraphs 10 and 14 above). The Government also confirmed that in their submissions (see paragraph 28 above). In the Court’s view, there is no doubt that the aim of the measure was the “protection of health”, as well as “the protection of the rights of others”, as provided for in Article 10 § 2 of the Convention. In this context, the Court refers to previous cases in which it has already considered similar aims to be legitimate (see, for example, Frankowicz, § 46; Hertel, § 42; Palusinski; Vérités Santé Pratique SARL; Hachette Filipacchi Presse Automobile and Dupuy, § 43; and Société de conception de presse et d’édition and Ponson, § 53, all cited above). The Court is consequently satisfied that the interference at issue in the present case equally pursued a legitimate aim within the meaning of Article 10 § 2 of the Convention.
Necessity of the interference in a democratic society
40.  The Court will now turn to the question of the proportionality of the interference and whether relevant and sufficient reasons were provided for it. It will begin by examining the nature and content of the statements at issue, together with their impact and audience, and conclude with the assessment of the sanction imposed on the applicant.
41.  The Court notes that the domestic courts found that the information on the issues of vaccination posted on the applicant’s website was purely onesided and negative (see paragraphs 10 and 14 above). Indeed, in the impugned article the applicant stated, for example, that “[w]hat we call a virus, literally a poison, is a pathogenic agent of various diseases, a speculation, an assumption, a supposition that is completely unproven; a working hypothesis at best” and that “illnesses appear to be evil accidents of nature”, as well as that “chemical vaccinations never protect against diseases” and that “we do not fall ill through bacteria and viruses” (see paragraph 6 above). The Court furthermore notes that the domestic practice does not generally prohibit to be critical of vaccination but rather calls for a more nuanced criticism, in particular if statements are made by doctors (see the domestic case-law cited in paragraphs 19-20 above). In the present case, however, the applicant’s negative statements were categorical (contrast with Hertel, cited above, § 48).
42.  Most importantly, the Court notes that the applicant was a doctor and the information posted on his website was found not to be in line with the current state of medical science, some not even in line with reason by two separate expert reports obtained by the Disciplinary Council of the Austrian Medical Association and the Regional Administrative Court (see paragraphs 7 and 10 above) (contrast with Hertel, cited above, § 50, which concerned a minority opinion in a sphere in which it was unlikely that any certainty existed; and compare Vérités Santé Pratique SARL, cited above, in which unverified medical information that discredited the conventional treatment given to patients with serious illnesses such as cancer or hypertension was being disseminated).
43.  Furthermore, the Court observes the potentially very wide impact of the applicant’s statements by their publication on his website, which were found to be connected to his medical practice (see paragraph 14 above) and therefore very easily accessible to everyone, including, in particular, medical laypersons (contrast with the specific readership and therefore limited impact in Hertel, § 49, and Vérités Santé Pratique SARL, both cited above). In this connection it reiterates that the internet, in the light of its accessibility and its capacity to store and communicate vast amounts of information, plays an important role in enhancing the public’s access to news and facilitating the dissemination of information in general. The Court has however also pointed to the risk of harm posed by content and communications on the internet to the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and freedoms (see Delfi AS v. Estonia [GC], no. 64569/09, § 133, ECHR 2015; Sanchez v. France [GC], no. 45581/15, § 161, 15 May 2023; and Hurbain v. Belgium [GC], no. 57292/16, § 236, 4 July 2023). The Court has already had the occasion to note the special duties by doctors, including the special relationship of medical practitioners with patients based on trust, confidentiality and confidence that the medical practitioners will use all available knowledge and means for ensuring the well-being of their patients, implying also a need to preserve solidarity among members of the profession, and the doctors’ obligation to provide their patients with an objective view of their state of health and treatment (see Frankowicz, cited above, §§ 49 and 51).
44.  In the particular context of purely negative information on vaccination, the Court further emphasises its findings in its Grand Chamber case of Vavřička and Others (cited above, §§ 135, 277, 279 and 282), in which it noted both the importance and the positive effects of vaccination in general, referring also to the WHO, according to which overwhelming evidence demonstrated the benefits of immunisation as one of the most successful and cost-effective health interventions known. Over the past several decades, immunisation had achieved many things, including the eradication of smallpox, an accomplishment that had been called one of humanity’s greatest triumphs. Vaccines had saved countless lives, lowered the global incidence of polio by 99 percent and reduced illness, disability and death from diphteria, tetanus, whooping cough, measles, Haemophilus influenzae type b disease and epidemic meningococcal A meningitis. The Court furthermore discerned a general consensus among the Contracting Parties, strongly supported by the specialised international bodies, that vaccination was one of the most successful and cost-effective health interventions and that each State should aim to achieve the highest possible level of vaccination among its population. This also encompassed the value of social solidarity, the purpose of the duty being to protect the health of all members of society, particularly those who were especially vulnerable with respect to certain diseases. The Court further reiterated that the Contracting States are under a positive obligation, by virtue of the relevant provisions of the Convention, notably Articles 2 and 8, to take appropriate measures to protect the life and health of those within their jurisdiction.
Against this background, the Court emphasises that practicing doctors enjoy freedom of expression under Article 10 and have the right to participate in debates on public health issues, including expressing critical and minority opinions. The exercise of that right is, however, not without limits, particularly when connected to the exercise of their profession. Because of their expert knowledge in the medical field and the professional services they offer in the interest of public health, they have a key role to play in the context of public health debates. They can be submitted to professional obligations in line with their duties and responsibilities under Article 10 § 2 of the Convention. Restricting the freedom of expression of doctors may be called for in cases of categorical and untrue public information on medical questions, in particular if that information is published on a website, to protect the health and well-being of others (compare with Hertel, cited above, § 50, which concerned information that appeared to be “devoid of merit”; see also Vérités Santé Pratique SARL, cited in detail in paragraph 35 above). In the present case, the statements were not only categorical, but scientifically untenable. For example, the statement that “chemical vaccinations never protect against diseases” (see paragraph 6 above) is in direct contradiction with information by the WHO (see Vavřička and Others, cited above, § 135). In this context, the Court also refers to its established case-law under Article 10 that in so far as statements of facts are concerned, proof of truth may be required (see Lingens v. Austria, no. 9815/82, § 46, 8 July 1986, and Oberschlick v. Austria, no. 11662/85, § 63, 23 May 1991). Moreover, the Court notes that the applicant made the impugned statements on his website in connection with his medical practice and thereby clearly advertising his services.
45.  Lastly, the Court will turn to the question of the nature and severity of the sanction imposed on the applicant. It notes that it concerned a disciplinary rather than a criminal sanction, in the form of a fine of EUR 2,000, an amount which, according to the domestic courts, was less than the estimated average monthly income of a doctor (see paragraph 10 above). This was deemed sufficient by the domestic courts to deter the applicant from committing future disciplinary offences. The Court further notes that the amount of EUR 2,000 was very low in view of the possible scale of the fine – which could amount to up to EUR 36,340 (see paragraph 17 above). It constituted approximately 5.5% of the maximum amount possible (compare the fines of EUR 30,000 and 20,000 imposed in Hachette Filipacchi Presse Automobile and Dupuy and Société de conception de presse et d’édition and Ponson (cited above), which, in the specific circumstances of those cases, were not considered disproportionate). Moreover, the fine was also suspended pending a probationary period of one year (see paragraph 7 above), which itself is also at the very lower end of the range of possibilities provided for by law – under section 139(3) of the Medical Practitioners Act, a disciplinary sanction can be imposed conditionally, with a probationary period of one to three years (see paragraph 17 above). Consequently, the Court concludes that the disciplinary sanction at issue in the instant case cannot be considered disproportionate.
Conclusion
46.  The foregoing considerations are sufficient to enable the Court to conclude that the domestic courts gave relevant and sufficient reasons in striking a fair balance between the competing interests of the general public and of the applicant’s freedom of expression at issue in the present case. The disciplinary sanction imposed on the applicant in the form of a suspended fine of a relatively low amount for making scientifically untenable statements about the ineffectiveness of vaccines on his website and thus in connection with his medical practice did not exceed the margin of appreciation so that the impugned measure can be regarded as “necessary in a democratic society” in the meaning of Article 10 § 2 of the Convention. The Court furthermore reiterates that where the balancing exercise has been undertaken by the national authorities in conformity with the criteria laid down in the Court’s case-law, the Court would require strong reasons to substitute its view for that of the domestic courts (see, for example, Delfi AS, § 139, and Halet, § 161, both cited above).
47.  There has accordingly been no violation of Article 10 of the Convention.
