DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE VEHABOVIĆ
I regret that I am unable to subscribe to the view of the majority that there has been no violation of Article 10.
The views expressed in the published article cannot be characterised as “devoid of reason”, as implied in paragraph 44 of the judgment. Although the applicant does in his article invite readers to adopt “healthy doubt” (paragraph 6), which implies questioning the established position of the medical profession, such an invitation should not be interpreted as absolutist or unreasonable.
The above-mentioned paragraph 44 explains why a violation of the right to freedom of expression was not found, stating that it is possible to limit that right if doctors present purely one-sided and negative information on medical issues. In the article the applicant called for a greater understanding of nature and more education. He invited readers to have the courage to trust their intuition and to question conventional medical practice. These messages should not be read in isolation, but in the light of the very nature of the website operated by the applicant. The name of that website clearly indicated that its content was homeopathic and aimed at self-help during treatment, placing it outside the realm of classical medicine and the usual approach to treating patients. It is therefore reasonable to assume that anyone who read the text and took its information on board – while acknowledging the possibility of exceptions – already had an open mind to alternative treatment methods. Contrary to the statements in paragraph 43, the possibility of the applicant’s post reaching a wider audience was insignificant; it was addressed to a specific group of readers. This can be illustrated by the following hypothetical scenario: What is the probability that a German-speaking person, unfamiliar with the meaning of the term “homeopathy” and without any prior knowledge of medicine, stumbles upon the website of a local doctor from an Austrian city, reads the content in relation to the name of the website and then begins to doubt the effectiveness of vaccination? I consider this scenario unlikely, and contrary to the applicant’s freedom of expression, which was already limited, if not negligible. I believe that previous knowledge of homeopathy or of the applicant as a doctor can be seen as a prerequisite for reading the contentious text on the above-mentioned website. There is extensive content of a homeopathic nature available on the internet, on pages much more popular than the applicant’s, and written by people with much greater public influence. In the context of the applicant’s individual freedom of expression, I therefore consider the restriction to be disproportionate and not to meet the last criterion for compliance with Article 10 – namely that the interference be “necessary in a democratic society”. On the contrary, considering the applicant’s limited public influence, as well as the other previously mentioned arguments, the ability to present such a position unimpeded is in fact necessary in a democratic society.
Furthermore, it is inappropriate to assume that the disputed text falls within the scope of “purely one-sided and negative” information, given that it ends with a call to “question vaccination”. An open invitation to question something implies respect for other points of view, which may be disseminated alongside one’s own; it is the opposite of alleged one-sidedness.
In a case with similar facts, Stambuk v. Germany (no. 37928/97, 17 October 2002), a doctor had been fined in disciplinary proceedings for an article published along with his photo in the press, which had been found to constitute advertising by a medical practitioner and thus to be in breach of the applicable regulations at the relevant time. The Court found that the applicant’s right to freedom of expression had been violated, considering that the provision prohibiting advertising had been interpreted narrowly and to the detriment of the applicant, without such restriction fulfilling the condition of “necessity in a democratic society”.
Crucially, the applicant in the present case did not damage the reputation of the medical profession practising in Austria by his conduct towards the community, patients or colleagues, or breach his professional duties – both essential components of the disciplinary offence provided for in section 136 of the Medical Practitioners Act (see paragraph 16).
Whereas in the Stambuk case (cited above) the Court did not find the publication of a photograph in the press sufficient to be considered advertising, in the present case it concluded that an online article expressing an unconventional opinion, without deceiving the public about the website’s content, did in fact amount to advertising.
However, in the Stambuk case, after finding the violation of Article 10, the Court added (ibid., § 51):
“... in the context of a liberal profession and having regard to the range of possible penalties, imposing a fine, even if at the lower end of the scale of fines, is not a negligible disciplinary punishment.”
While in its earlier judgment the Court concluded that imposing one of the lesser penalties prescribed by law was still not insignificant, in the present case even a conditional punishment represents a form of censorship and deterrence from any future expression of opinions and is therefore a threat to democratic society.
