INTRODUCTION
1.  The application concerns the death of the applicant’s brother, a wanted person, who was killed during an operation carried out by agents of the State Security Service (“the SSS”) in connection with his arrest.
THE FACTS
2.  The applicant was born in 1976 and lives in Ganja. She was represented by Mr J. Javadov, a lawyer based in Azerbaijan.
3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Mr Ç. Əsgərov.
4.  The facts of the case, as submitted by the parties, may be summarised as follows.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
5.  On 3 July 2018 the Head of the Ganja City Executive Authority and his bodyguard were shot by Y.S. in front of the executive authority’s building, as a result of which they were severely injured. The attack received widespread media coverage in the country.
6.  Criminal proceedings were instituted in connection with the shooting, and Y.S. was arrested.
7.  On 15 July 2018, within the framework of criminal case no. 180556037, the applicant’s brother (A.B.) was charged, together with other persons, with numerous criminal offences, such as, inter alia, participation in murder by a group of persons, terrorism, illegal possession of weapons and usurpation of State power by force.
8.  On the same date a search warrant was issued in respect of A.B., who was declared a wanted person.
DEATH OF A.B. AND THE ENSUING CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
9.  On an unspecified date, agents of the SSS received information that A.B. was hiding in a motel located on the outskirts of Baku.
10.  At around 10.45 p.m. on 20 July 2018, agents of the SSS carried out an operation in order to arrest A.B. He was killed during the operation.
11.  It appears from the documents in the case file that the prosecuting authorities were immediately informed of A.B.’s death, and a record of the inspection of the scene of the crime was drawn up and signed by the investigator in charge of the case. The record states that the inspection began at 11.30 p.m. on 20 July 2018 and ended at 2.20 p.m. on 21 July 2018. According to the record, A.B.’s body was lying on the floor in a room at the motel and there were four gunshot wounds to his body. There was also a bullet trace on the wall to the left of the entrance to the room; the bullet had pierced the ceiling of the room. A.B. had a pistol in his right hand and there was a silencer under his right foot. Five cartridge cases and thirteen unused cartridges were found at the crime scene. Various photographs were taken of the room, A.B.’s body, the pistol, the silencer, the cartridge cases and the unused cartridges.
12.  On 21 July 2018 a record of the examination of the body was drawn up in the presence of a forensic expert.
13.  On 21 July 2018 the investigator in charge of the case ordered a postmortem examination of A.B.’s body, which was carried out on the same day. Report no. 114 showed that there were four gunshot wounds to A.B.’s body (two to his head, one to the right part of his body next to the costal margin, and one to the left part of his ribcage) and his death had resulted from a fractured skull, a partial expulsion of the brain and a cerebral haemorrhage as a result of the two gunshot wounds to the head. The report also indicated that all the shots had been fired at long range and that A.B. had been in a vertical position when he had sustained the gunshot wound to the right part of his body, next to the costal margin, and that he had been in a horizontal position when he had sustained the other gunshot wounds. According to the report, he had sustained the gunshot wound to the left part of his ribcage shortly after his death (ölümündən bir qədər sonra).
14.  On 22 July 2018 the investigator questioned X.X., who was the owner and manager of the motel in which A.B. had been staying. She stated that since 17 July 2018 A.B. had been renting a bed in a room with four beds and that he had been sharing the room with V.B. At around 9 p.m. on 20 July 2018 an agent of the SSS had shown X.X. a photograph of A.B., asking her whether she knew that person. She had confirmed that she did, indicating the room in which A.B. had been staying. At around 11 p.m. the agents of the SSS had come to the yard of the motel and had gone directly to A.B.’s room. At the time X.X. had been in the yard. Two agents of the SSS had taken V.B. out of the room. At that moment, shooting had been heard.
15.  On 23 July 2018 the investigator questioned V.B., who had been sharing the same room with A.B. in the motel. He stated that he had not known A.B. previously and that on 20 July 2018, when he had returned from work, A.B. had already been in the room. At around 11 p.m. three agents of the SSS had entered the room and two of them had taken V.B. out of the room. At that point A.B. was in his bed (Həmin vaxt A.B. özünə aid çarpayıda olmuşdur). Approximately one minute later V.B. had heard shooting. There had also been other agents of the SSS in the motel yard.
16.  On 1 August 2018 the investigator questioned X.X.’s husband (I.X.), who made a statement similar to that made by X.X. (see paragraph 14 above).
17.  On 18 August 2018 the investigator questioned the applicant, who stated that she had learned, from the media, of the death of her brother in an operation conducted by the SSS.
18.  In the meantime, on 1 August 2018 the investigator ordered forensic ballistic and trace examinations of the pistol and silencer, the cartridge cases and unused cartridges, and the clothes that A.B. had been wearing on 20 July 2018, asking the experts various questions. However, the investigator did not enquire about the possible presence of fingerprints on the pistol and silencer. Moreover, it does not appear from the investigator’s decision that the weapons used by the agents of the SSS were submitted for forensic examination.
19.  Report no. 20655/20656/20657, dated 7 September 2018, concluded that the weapon in question was an MP 371 pistol, which had been subjected to modifications, and that one of the five cartridge cases found at the crime scene had been fired from that pistol.
20.  On 24 October 2018 the investigator in charge of the case refused to institute criminal proceedings, finding that there had been no criminal element in the actions of the agents of the SSS. The relevant part of the decision reads as follows:
“Accordingly, it was established during the inquiry that at 10.45 p.m. on 20 July 2018, in the course of the operational search measures carried out by the agents of the SSS, A.B., born on ... in ..., registered at the address of ..., living at the address of ... on the basis of a daily rental, resisted by firing the pistol ... and was eliminated by a shot fired by the operational group in response.
As is indicated in the report dated 7 September 2018 issued by the Forensic Expertise Centre of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Azerbaijan, one cartridge of calibre 9x18 found at the crime scene was fired from the pistol, an MP 371 pistol which had been subjected to modifications, found in A.B.’s right hand during the inspection of the crime scene.
That proves that A.B. resisted by using a weapon.
For that reason, having regard to the lack of elements of any criminal act provided for by the criminal law of the Republic of Azerbaijan in the acts of the agents of the SSS, the institution of criminal proceedings in connection with the material collected must be rejected.”
REMEDIES USED BY THE APPLICANT
21.  On 27 June 2019 the applicant lodged a complaint against the investigator’s decision of 24 October 2018 with the Binagadi District Court, arguing that her brother had been deliberately killed by the agents of the SSS and that the investigator had failed to carry out an effective investigation into his killing. In particular, she stated that the investigator had failed to identify and question the agents of the SSS who had participated in the operation and had killed her brother. She pointed out that as those individuals had not been questioned, it had not been possible to establish why and in what circumstances her brother had been killed. She also referred to the conclusions of forensic report no. 114, according to which A.B. had been in a horizontal position when he had sustained two gunshot wounds to the head causing his death and that he had sustained the gunshot wound to the left part of his ribcage after his death. In the applicant’s view, those conclusions proved that A.B. had been killed deliberately, and not because he had resisted. In that connection, she noted that according to the witness statement made by V.B., there had been no resistance when the agents of the SSS had entered the room. The applicant also contended that the agents of the SSS should have arrested her brother and taken him out of the room and not V.B., who was the only witness to the events. Furthermore, the applicant contested the investigator’s conclusions that A.B. had resisted by using a weapon, arguing that the investigation had failed to prove that the pistol found at the crime scene belonged to her brother. Lastly, she complained that the prosecuting authorities had failed to provide her with a copy of the decision of 24 October 2018 in a timely manner.
22.  On 9 July 2019 the Binagadi District Court dismissed the applicant’s complaint, without addressing the above-mentioned arguments raised in her complaint or providing any explanation in that connection.
23.  On 25 July 2019 the applicant appealed against that decision. In particular, she complained that the Binagadi District Court had failed to examine her complaints concerning the investigator’s decision of 24 October 2018 and that the court’s decision had been a reproduction of the investigator’s decision of 24 October 2018.
24.  On 5 August 2019 the Baku Court of Appeal dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the Binagadi District Court’s decision of 9 July 2019.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS
25.  It appears from the documents in the case file that in the course of the investigation of criminal case no. 180556037, on 25 October 2019 a prosecutor at the Serious Crimes Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office questioned E.S. – an agent of the SSS who had participated in the operation during which the applicant’s brother had been killed – as a witness. E.S. stated that after receiving the information that A.B., who was a wanted person, had been hiding at the given address, he had gone there together with some colleagues. They had shown a photograph of the wanted person to the owner of the building, who had confirmed A.B.’s presence there and had indicated the room in which he had been staying. According to E.S., when they had wanted to open the door to that room, A.B. began firing in his direction. At that point, they had identified themselves as agents of the SSS and had asked him to surrender. A.B. had become more aggressive and had continued firing at them, yelling anti-State and religious slogans and saying that he would not surrender. When he had attempted to attack them, he had been neutralised by the agents. They had immediately informed the prosecuting authorities of the incident.
26.  On 20 November 2019 the applicant lodged a request with the Serious Crimes Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office, asking for the institution of criminal proceedings in connection with A.B.’s death. She noted that E.S.’s statement clearly contradicted the statements made by V.B. and X.X. She also asked the prosecuting authorities to order forensic examinations in order to determine the possible presence of fingerprints belonging to A.B. and to the agents of the SSS on the pistol, the silencer and the cartridges.
27.  On 22 November 2019 an investigator at the Serious Crimes Department of the Prosecutor General’s Office dismissed the applicant’s request, finding that by a decision of 24 October 2018 the prosecuting authorities had already refused to institute criminal proceedings in connection with A.B.’s death.
28.  On 5 December 2019 the applicant contested the investigator’s decision by lodging a complaint against it with the Nasimi District Court.
29.  On 9 December 2019 the Nasimi District Court and on 10 January 2020 the Baku Court of Appeal refused to examine the applicant’s complaint, finding that complaints of that kind should not be examined under the procedure for judicial review of the actions or decisions of the prosecuting authorities, as provided for by Article 449 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK
CRIMINAL CODE
30.  Article 37.1 of the Criminal Code provides that causing harm to a person who has committed an offence, while that person is being arrested for the purposes of bringing him or her before the competent State authorities or preventing him or her from committing new offences, is not considered an offence provided that the use of all other means for that purpose have not produced the necessary results, and the limits of the measures necessary for that purpose were not exceeded. Under Article 37.2 of the Criminal Code, if the means and methods used for the arrest of a person who has committed an offence are manifestly disproportionate to the degree of public danger of the act committed and of the person who committed that act, as well as to the circumstances of the arrest, and unnecessarily cause obviously excessive harm to the person, this is considered to exceed the limit of the measures necessary for the arrest of the person. Exceeding the limit in that manner engages criminal liability only in the event of intentional harm.
31.  Article 123.2 of the Criminal Code provides that intentional murder by exceeding the necessary limits for the arrest of a person who has committed an offence is punishable by correctional labour for a term of up to two years, or restriction of liberty for a term of up to three years, or imprisonment for a term of up to three years.
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
32.  Under Articles 39.1.1 and 39.1.2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the CCrP”), criminal proceedings may not be instituted or, if instituted, must be discontinued at any stage of the pre-trial proceedings if it is found that there is no criminal element in the act (əməldə cinayət tərkibi olmadıqda).
33.  Under Articles 87.6 and 102.6 of the CCrP, a person recognised as a victim, or his or her representative, has various procedural rights within the framework of criminal proceedings. Articles 87.6.10 and 102.6.8 provide that a victim or his or her representative have the right to familiarise themselves with the criminal case file and to obtain copies of relevant documents following the termination of the preliminary investigation or the discontinuation of the criminal proceedings.
34.  Chapter LII of the CCrP lays down the procedure by which parties to criminal proceedings may challenge the actions or decisions of prosecuting authorities before a court. In particular, Article 449.3.5 provides that a victim or counsel may challenge within the criminal proceedings the actions or decisions of prosecuting authorities concerning a refusal to institute criminal proceedings, or the suspension or termination of criminal proceedings. The judge examining the lawfulness of the prosecuting authorities’ actions or decisions may quash them if he or she finds them to be unlawful (Article 451). The judge’s decision may be challenged in an appellate court, in accordance with the procedure set out in Articles 452 and 453 of the CCrP.
RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL DOCUMENTS
35.  The relevant part of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials (adopted by United Nations General Assembly Resolution 34/169 of 17 November 1979) provides:
Article 3
“Law enforcement officials may use force only when strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance of their duty.”
36.  The relevant parts of the Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials (adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, 27 August to 7 September 1990) read:
“9.  Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in selfdefence or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or serious injury, to prevent the perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life, to arrest a person presenting such a danger and resisting their authority, or to prevent his or her escape, and only when less extreme means are insufficient to achieve these objectives. In any event, intentional lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
10.  In the circumstances provided for under principle 9, law enforcement officials shall identify themselves as such and give a clear warning of their intent to use firearms, with sufficient time for the warning to be observed, unless to do so would unduly place the law enforcement officials at risk or would create a risk of death or serious harm to other persons, or would be clearly inappropriate or pointless in the circumstances of the incident.”
