ARTICLE 1


Procedural safeguards relating to expulsion of aliens

1. An alien lawfully resident in the territory of a State shall not
be expelled therefrom except in pursuance of a decision reached
in accordance with law and shall be allowed:


(a)to submit reasons against his expulsion,
(b)to have his case reviewed, and
(c) to be represented for these purposes before the competent
authority or a person or persons designated by that
authority.

2. An alien may be expelled before the exercise of his rights
under paragraph 1.(a), (b) and (c) of this Article, when such
expulsion is necessary in the interests of public order or is
grounded on reasons of national security.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 2


Right of appeal in criminal matters

1. Everyone convicted of a criminal offence by a tribunal shall
have the right to have his conviction or sentence reviewed by a
higher tribunal. The exercise of this right, including the grounds on
which it may be exercised, shall be governed by law.
2. This right may be subject to exceptions in regard to offences
of a minor character, as prescribed by law, or in cases in which
the person concerned was tried in the first instance by the highest
tribunal or was convicted following an appeal against acquittal.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 3


Compensation for wrongful conviction
When a person has by a final decision been convicted of a
criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has been
reversed, or he has been pardoned, on the ground that a new or
newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a
miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as
a result of such conviction shall be compensated according to the
law or the practice of the State concerned, unless it is proved that
the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly or
partly attributable to him.


-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 4


Right not to be tried or punished twice

1. No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again in criminal
proceedings under the jurisdiction of the same State for an offence
for which he has already been finally acquitted or convicted in
accordance with the law and penal procedure of that State.
2. The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not prevent
the reopening of the case in accordance with the law and penal
procedure of the State concerned, if there is evidence of new or
newly discovered facts, or if there has been a fundamental defect
in the previous proceedings, which could affect the outcome of the
case.
3. No derogation from this Article shall be made under
Article 15 of the Convention.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 5


Equality between spouses

Spouses shall enjoy equality of rights and responsibilities of a
private law character between them, and in their relations with
their children, as to marriage, during marriage and in the event
of its dissolution. This Article shall not prevent States from taking
such measures as are necessary in the interests of the children.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 6


Territorial application

1. Any State may at the time of signature or when depositing
its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the
territory or territories to which the Protocol shall apply and State
the extent to which it undertakes that the provisions of this Protocol
shall apply to such territory or territories.
    2. Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed
    to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the
    application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the
    declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter
    into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of
    a period of two months after the date of receipt by the Secretary
    General of such declaration.
    3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs
    may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration,
    be withdrawn or modified by a notification addressed to the
    Secretary General. The withdrawal or modification shall become
    effective on the first day of the month following the expiration of a
    period of two months after the date of receipt of such notification
    by the Secretary General.
    4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be
    deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of
    Article 56 of the Convention.
    5. The territory of any State to which this Protocol applies by
    virtue of ratification, acceptance or approval by that State, and
    each territory to which this Protocol is applied by virtue of a
    declaration by that State under this Article, may be treated as
    separate territories for the purpose of the reference in Article 1 to
    the territory of a State.
    6. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance
    with paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article may at any time
    thereafter declare on behalf of one or more of the territories
    to which the declaration relates that it accepts the competence
    of the Court to receive applications from individuals, non-
    governmental organisations or groups of individuals as
    provided in Article 34 of the Convention in respect of Articles 1
    to 5 of this Protocol.


-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 7


Relationship to the Convention

As between the States Parties, the provisions of Article 1 to 6
of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles to the
Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall apply
accordingly.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 8


Signature and ratification

This Protocol shall be open for signature by member States of the
Council of Europe which have signed the Convention. It is subject
to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the
Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol
without previously or simultaneously ratifying the Convention.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be
deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 9


Entry into force

1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the
month following the expiration of a period of two months after
the date on which seven member States of the Council of Europe
have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in
accordance with the provisions of Article 8.
2. In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses
its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force
on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period
of two months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 10


Depositary functions


The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the
member States of the Council of Europe of:
(a) any signature;
(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval;
(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance
with Articles 6 and 9;
(d) any other act, notification or declaration relating to this
Protocol.


In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto,
have signed this Protocol.
