ARTICLE 1


General prohibition of discrimination

1. The enjoyment of any right set forth by law shall be secured
without discrimination on any ground such as sex, race, colour,
language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, association with a national minority, property, birth or
other status.
2. No one shall be discriminated against by any public authority
on any ground such as those mentioned in paragraph 1.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 2


Territorial application

1. Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing
its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval, specify the
territory or territories to which this Protocol shall apply.
2. Any State may at any later date, by a declaration addressed
to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, extend the
application of this Protocol to any other territory specified in the
declaration. In respect of such territory the Protocol shall enter into
force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a
period of three months after the date of receipt by the Secretary
General of such declaration.
3. Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs
may, in respect of any territory specified in such declaration,
be withdrawn or modified by a notification addressed to the
Secretary General of the Council of Europe. The withdrawal or
modification shall become effective on the first day of the month
following the expiration of a period of three months after the date
of receipt of such notification by the Secretary General.


4. A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be
deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of
Article 56 of the Convention.
5. Any State which has made a declaration in accordance with
paragraph 1 or 2 of this Article may at any time thereafter declare
on behalf of one or more of the territories to which the declaration
relates that it accepts the competence of the Court to receive
applications from individuals, non-governmental organisations or
groups of individuals as provided by Article 34 of the Convention
in respect of Article 1 of this Protocol.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 3


Relationship to the Convention

As between the States Parties, the provisions of Articles 1
and 2 of this Protocol shall be regarded as additional Articles
to the Convention, and all the provisions of the Convention shall
apply accordingly.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 4


Signature and ratification

This Protocol shall be open for signature by member States of the
Council of Europe which have signed the Convention. It is subject
to ratification, acceptance or approval. A member State of the
Council of Europe may not ratify, accept or approve this Protocol
without previously or simultaneously ratifying the Convention.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be
deposited with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 5
Entry into force

1. This Protocol shall enter into force on the first day of the
month following the expiration of a period of three months after
the date on which ten member States of the Council of Europe
have expressed their consent to be bound by the Protocol in
accordance with the provisions of Article 4.
2. In respect of any member State which subsequently expresses
its consent to be bound by it, the Protocol shall enter into force
on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period
of three months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 6
Depositary functions
The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify all the
member States of the Council of Europe of:
(a) any signature;
(b) the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance
or approval;
(c) any date of entry into force of this Protocol in accordance
with Articles 2 and 5;
(d) any other act, notification or communication relating to
this Protocol.
In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorised thereto,
have signed this Protocol.
