ARTICLE 1


Protection of property


Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment
of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions
except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided
for by law and by the general principles of international law.
The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair
the right of a State to enforce such laws as it deems necessary
to control the use of property in accordance with the general
interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions
or penalties.


-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 2


Right to education

No person shall be denied the right to education. In the exercise
of any functions which it assumes in relation to education and to
teaching, the State shall respect the right of parents to ensure such
education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and
philosophical convictions.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 3


Right to free elections

The High Contracting Parties undertake to hold free elections at
reasonable intervals by secret ballot, under conditions which will
ensure the free expression of the opinion of the people in the
choice of the legislature.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 4


Territorial application

Any High Contracting Party may at the time of signature or
ratification or at any time thereafter communicate to the Secretary
General of the Council of Europe a declaration stating the extent
to which it undertakes that the provisions of the present Protocol
shall apply to such of the territories for the international relations
of which it is responsible as are named therein.

Any High Contracting Party which has communicated a
declaration in virtue of the preceding paragraph may from time to
time communicate a further declaration modifying the terms of any
former declaration or terminating the application of the provisions
of this Protocol in respect of any territory.


A declaration made in accordance with this Article shall be
deemed to have been made in accordance with paragraph 1 of
Article 56 of the Convention.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 5


Relationship to the Convention


As between the High Contracting Parties the provisions of
Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this Protocol shall be regarded as
additional Articles to the Convention and all the provisions of the
Convention shall apply accordingly.

-----------------------------------------
ARTICLE 6


Signature and ratification
This Protocol shall be open for signature by the members of the
Council of Europe, who are the signatories of the Convention;
it shall be ratified at the same time as or after the ratification
of the Convention. It shall enter into force after the deposit of
ten instruments of ratification. As regards any signatory ratifying
subsequently, the Protocol shall enter into force at the date of the
deposit of its instrument of ratification.


The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the Secretary
General of the Council of Europe, who will notify all members of
the names of those who have ratified.
