INTRODUCTION
1.  The application concerns the introduction of the possibility for life sentences imposed in Ukraine to be reduced in length and the compliance thereof with Article 3 requirements.
THE FACTS
2.  The applicant was born in 1984 and is detained in Romny Prison no. 56, Perekhrestivka, Sumy Region, Ukraine. He had been granted legal aid and was represented by Messrs M. Tarakhkalo, H. de Suremain, V. Melnychuk and Ms A. Kozmenko, lawyers.
3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms M. Sokorenko, from the Ministry of Justice.
4.  The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
5.  On 18 June 2003 the Kyiv Regional Court of Appeal sentenced the applicant to life imprisonment for a double murder committed in December 2002. This judgment was upheld by the Supreme Court on 2 October 2003.
6.  Between 2014 and 2019 the applicant lodged several unsuccessful applications with the domestic courts for his life sentence to be commuted to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
7.  In February 2021 the applicant lodged an application for release on parole; that application was rejected by the courts at two levels of jurisdiction for lack of any legal basis on, respectively, 15 April 2021 and 16 November 2022.
8.  On 1 December 2022 a commission was convened in Romny Prison to examine the degree to which the applicant had been reformed; it found that the applicant did not qualify to lodge an application for the commuting of his life sentence to a fixed term of imprisonment. According to the Government, the applicant was served with the commission’s finding before 31 December 2022, while the applicant maintained that he had only received the full text of the commission’s finding in mid-August 2023.
RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND PRACTICE
State of domestic law AND PRACTICE prior to THE amendments of 18 October 2022
2001 Criminal Code
9.  On 5 April 2001 Parliament enacted a new Criminal Code, which entered into force on 1 September 2001. The relevant provisions of the Code in the original wording read as follows:
Article 81
Release on parole
“1.  Release on parole may be applied in respect of persons sentenced to correctional work, duty-related restrictions for military officers, restriction of liberty, custody in a penal battalion for military officers, or [fixed-term] imprisonment ...
2.  Parole may be granted if a sentenced person displays decent behaviour and diligence in work by way of proof of his or her reformation ...”
Article 82
Commutation of the remaining part of a punishment to a less severe punishment
“1.  The remaining part of the punishment of persons sentenced to restriction or deprivation of liberty may be commuted by a court to a less severe punishment ...”
Judgment of 16 September 2021 by the Constitutional Court on the review of the sentence of a person serving life imprisonment
10.  Referring inter alia, to the case-law of the Court, the Constitutional Court found the first paragraphs of Articles 81 and 82 of the Criminal Code (see paragraph 9 above) to be unconstitutional in so far as they did not apply to persons who had been sentenced to life imprisonment. In its decision the court noted, in particular, that when amending the relevant legislation in order to permit the commuting of a life sentence to a less severe sentence or early release, it should be taken into account that commuting life imprisonment to a fixed term of imprisonment should not constitute a precondition for early release.
Judgment of the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court of 8 July 2020 in case no. 1-42/2004
11.  In 2019 the Court found, in Petukhov v. Ukraine (no. 2) (no. 41216/13, 12 March 2019), a violation of Article 3 of the Convention in respect of the insufficiency of the medical assistance provided to Mr Petukhov and the impossibility of reducing of his life sentence. Mr Petukhov applied for a review of his case by the Supreme Court on the basis of the Court’s judgment. The Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court rejected his application. In particular, with regard to the impossibility of reducing his life sentence, the Grand Chamber of the Supreme Court referred to the Court’s conclusions under Article 46 of the Convention (namely, that the irreducibility of life sentence was a systemic problem calling for a reform of the system of review of whole-life sentences) and noted that it was not empowered by law to review a life sentence (for more details, see Kupinskyy v. Ukraine, no. 5084/18, §§ 32 and 40, 10 November 2022).
law AND PRACTICE FOLLOWING THE amendments of 18 October 2022
2001 Criminal Code
12.  By Law no. 2690-IX of 18 October 2022 (“the Amendment Act”), Articles 81 and 82 of the Code were supplemented in so far as relevant by the following provisions:
Article 81
Release on parole
“...
3.  Release on parole may be applied after a sentenced person has ... served:
...
3)  at least three quarters of the sentence set by a court for an especially grievous crime, in the case of commuting life imprisonment to a fixed term of imprisonment ...”
Article 82
Commutation of punishment or the remaining part of a punishment to a less severe punishment
“1.  The remaining part of the ... [sentence of] life imprisonment may be commuted by a court to a less severe punishment, the term of which shall start running from the day of commutation ...
...
5.  Life imprisonment may be commuted to imprisonment for the term of fifteen to twenty years, if a sentenced person has served at least fifteen years of the punishment that was set by the court ...”
13.  Those amendments of 18 October 2022, which entered into force on 6 November 2022, introduced a system which was meant to make the life sentence reducible. The system provides a possibility for a person serving a life sentence to apply, after having served at least 15 years of the original life sentence, for its commutation into fixed-term imprisonment from fifteen to twenty years, to be served from the moment of the commutation. The period of fixed term imprisonment can be further reduced for good behaviour. Taking into account the possibility for such reduction, under the new legislation cited above, the minimum period of time a life prisoner has to serve is 26 years and 3 months in total (fifteen years of the original life sentence plus fifteen years fixed-term imprisonment minus a reduction for good behaviour).
2012 Criminal Procedure Code
14.  Under the Amendment Act (see paragraph 12), the second part of Article 31 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was supplemented by paragraph 3, under which an application for the commuting of a life imprisonment to a fixed term of imprisonment should be examined by a court of three judges. A similar provision that set forth the procedure for the judicial examination of issues relating to the execution of sentences was added to Article 539 of the Code. The latter Article also provides for the right of a prisoner and his or her lawyer to participate in such a judicial examination.
2003 Code on the Execution of Sentences
15.  The Amendment Act inserted into the Code a specification of the procedure to be observed when lodging an application for the commuting of a life imprisonment to a fixed term of imprisonment.
Article 154
Procedure for early release from serving a sentence
“...
3.  In respect of a prisoner to whom, under Articles 81, 82 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine, parole may be granted by way of commuting life imprisonment to punishment in the form of a fixed term of imprisonment ..., the prison body or institution shall within a month lodge an application to a court ... Within a month of a prisoner serving that part of [his or her] sentence provided by the Criminal Code of Ukraine, the administration of a prison body or institution is obliged to consider the possibility of [his or her] lodging an application for ... the commuting of [his or her] life sentence to a fixed term of imprisonment ...
...
7.  In the event of a court refusing to commute a [prisoner’s] punishment or the remaining part of [his] punishment to a less severe punishment, a fresh application to this end in respect of persons sentenced to life imprisonment, ... may be lodged no earlier than one year from the date of [that] decision ...
...
12.  Together with the application for the commuting of a prisoner’s life imprisonment in its remaining part to a less severe punishment, the administration of the [prison] shall submit to a court its findings regarding the extent to which the person sentenced to life imprisonment has been reformed.
The determination of the degree to which a person sentenced to life imprisonment has been reformed and the drawing-up of a conclusion shall be carried out with the participation of an authorised probation body.
The procedure and methodology [“the release on parole mechanism”] for determining the degree to which a person sentenced to life imprisonment has been reformed shall be established by the central executive body, which ensures the formation of State policy in the field of the execution of sentences.
The main purpose of submitting a conclusion regarding the degree to which a person sentenced to life imprisonment has been reformed is to provide the court with the information necessary to be able to determine the possibility of commuting his life sentence to a less severe punishment and to determine ... the length of imprisonment of the prisoner in respect of whom this issue is being considered.
13.  A person sentenced to life imprisonment – in addition to applying for the commutation of his or her punishment to a less severe punishment in the form of a fixed term of imprisonment – shall submit an individual plan for his or her reform and resocialisation. Such a plan should [i] contain measures whose implementation during the period in which that person serves a less severe punishment in the form of a fixed term of imprisonment would allow him or her to eliminate factors that might adversely affect [his/her] abstention from reoffending, and [ii] list facts indicating the prospects for the reform and resocialisation of the convicted person after release.
The form of an individual plan for reform and resocialisation shall be established by the central executive body that ensures the formation of State policy in the field of the execution of sentences.
The convicted person on whom punishment in the form of a fixed term of imprisonment is imposed by way of commutation to a less severe punishment (and who has the right to parole) shall additionally submit to the court a report on the implementation of the individual reform and resocialisation plan while serving the less severe sentence – including an analysis of the reasons for the success or failure to implement the measures set forth in such a plan.”
16.  Under the same Act, Article 140 of the Code was supplemented by the provision that those prisoners serving a life sentence (hereinafter “life prisoners”) whose punishment had been commuted to a fixed term of imprisonment should be placed in ordinary residential premises in a maximum-security prison (as opposed to cell-type premises).
17.  Article 151 of the Code was amended to allow life prisoners to apply for presidential clemency after fifteen years of serving their sentences, and not after twenty years, as had been provided previously.
Order no. 294/5 of the Ministry of Justice of 19 January 2023 on the determination of the degree to which a prisoner has been reformed
18.  The Order, which entered into force on 2 February 2023, approved the procedure and methodology for determining the degree to which a prisoner has been reformed and for drawing up an individual plan for that prisoner’s reform and resocialisation.
19.  The procedure applies both to the releasing of a prisoner on parole and to the commuting of a punishment to a less severe one. Under the methodology, when a prisoner applies or is eligible for parole or the commutation of his or her punishment, the degree to which he has been reformed shall be assessed (and points shall be awarded) according to his attitude to: the crime committed by the prisoner, social life, prison rules, work, private (family) life, the consumption of narcotics/alcohol, and making plans for his future life. The overall assessment of the prisoner further includes an assessment of the risk of his reoffending, his progress in respect of the implementation of an individual programme of social educational work, his behaviour while serving his sentence service, and his psychological characteristics. The findings of such an assessment is reflected in the number of points obtained by the prisoners; those who score sixty-one points or more are considered to be “embarked on the path of reform (rehabilitated)” under Articles 81 and 82 of the Criminal Code, and they could be recommended for a change to the punishment imposed on them and the application to that end is lodged with a court.
Order no. 957/21269 of the Ministry of Justice of 14 June 2012 on approval of instructions regarding work of units (groups, sectors, senior inspectors) in order to oversee the execution of judgments by prison institutions and pre-trial detention centres
20.  By means of Order no. 631/5 of the Ministry of Justice – which was adopted on 17 February 2023 and which entered into force on 3 March 2023 – the Instruction was amended to include details of work to be undertaken by units with prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, in accordance with amendments introduced in respect of the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraph 15 above).
Decision of 17 January 2024 delivered by the Constitutional Court regarding the constitutionality of Article 81 § 3 (3) of the Criminal Code
21.  The Constitutional Court examined the constitutional complaint lodged by Mr L., who argued that the newly-introduced system whereby life sentences could be commuted to fixed-term sentences (see paragraph 12 above) was contrary to the Constitution, the Court’s case-law and the above-mentioned decision of the Constitutional Court of 16 September 2021 (see paragraph 10 above). The court rejected the complaint as unfounded on the grounds that the complainant simply disagreed with the way in which the legislature regulated the procedure for releasing life prisoners on parole.
Decisions delivered by courts of general jurisdiction regarding the commutation of life sentences
22.  According to the information provided to the Government Agent by the Department for the Execution of Criminal Sentences of the Ministry of Justice, between 19 January and 1 August 2023 eighteen life prisoners had their life sentence commuted to a fixed term of imprisonment.
International material
23.  The relevant texts of the Council of Europe and other international legal texts concerning the imposition and reviewing of life sentences, and the importance to be attached to rehabilitation, are set out in Kafkaris v. Cyprus ([GC], no. 21906/04, §§ 68-76, ECHR 2008); Vinter and Others v. the United Kingdom ([GC], nos. 66069/09 and 2 others, §§ 60-67, ECHR 2013 (extracts)); and Murray v. the Netherlands ([GC], no. 10511/10, §§ 70-76, 26 April 2016).
24.  A summary of, and relevant extracts from, the 25th General Report of the CPT entitled “Situation of life-sentenced prisoners” (CPT/Inf(2016)10part) can be found in the Court’s judgment in the case of Matiošaitis and Others v. Lithuania (nos. 22662/13 and 7 others, §§ 114-15, 23 May 2017).
25.  The relevant excerpt from the Report to the Ukrainian Government on the visit to Ukraine carried out by the CPT from 8 to 21 December 2017 (CPT/Inf (2018) 41) read as follows (original emphasis, footnotes omitted):
“5. Life-sentenced prisoners
78.  Concerning the regime for life-sentenced prisoners, the situation has remained basically unchanged as the relevant legislation has not been amended despite the CPT’s long-standing recommendations. Lifers continued to be segregated from other prisoners and spent up to 23 hours per day in their (usually) double or triple-occupancy cells, with little in terms of organised activities and association (with the exception of occasional work and limited access to the gym, table tennis and the Internet – up to one hour per day – in Lviv and Ivano-Frankivsk). The situation was particularly difficult for those of the inmates who were accommodated alone in their cells (either on their own request or on security grounds, because they were deemed to represent a danger to their fellow prisoners), whose regime de facto amounted to solitary confinement, for years on end.
79.  The CPT remains of the view that the regime for life-sentenced prisoners in Ukraine should be fundamentally reviewed, so as to include a structured programme of constructive and preferably out-of-cell activities; social workers and psychologists should be proactive in working with life-sentenced prisoners to encourage them to take part in that programme and attempt to engage them safely with other prisoners for at least a part of each day. There is no justification to systematically segregate lifesentenced prisoners from the rest of prisoner population.
Consequently, the CPT once again calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to develop the regime for life-sentenced prisoners, in particular by providing more communal activities (including access to work and education). Access to the Internet should be offered to life-sentenced prisoners at Kyiv SIZO.
The Committee also once again urges the Ukrainian authorities to integrate life-sentenced prisoners into the general prison population as soon as possible following their conviction (taking into account the European Prison Rules and the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation Rec (2003) 23 on the management by prison administrations of a life sentence and other long-term prisoners).
80.  Furthermore, in all the establishments accommodating life-sentenced prisoners (except Ivano-Frankivsk SIZO), custodial staff continued to use unmuzzled service dogs inside the lifers’ units, when escorting prisoners outside their cells including for outdoor exercise. The CPT once again calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to stop this dangerous and intimidating practice immediately.
81.  Further, the Committee must recall the basic principle that, in order to reduce the harmful effects of imprisonment and to promote the resettlement of prisoners under conditions that seek to guarantee the safety of the outside community, the law should offer a realistic prospect of conditional release to all sentenced prisoners, including lifesentence prisoners. This is still not the case at present.
The CPT once again calls upon the Ukrainian authorities to amend the legislation with a view to making conditional release (parole) available to all lifesentenced prisoners, subject to a review of the threat to society posed by them on the basis of an individual risk assessment. Reference is also made here to the CPT’s 25th General Report.”
