THE LAW
I. ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE CONVENTION
26.  The applicant complained of the fact that contrary to Article 3 of the Convention his life sentence could not be reduced and maintained that the new release on parole mechanism for persons sentenced to life imprisonment did not remedy the situation. Article 3 of the Convention reads as follows:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
Admissibility
27.  The Government argued that the new release on parole mechanism was both accessible and effective and that the application should accordingly be rejected as manifestly ill-founded. For the same reason, it could be rejected for being incompatible ratione personae with the applicant’s loss of victim status. Lastly, the Government submitted that the applicant could have (i) challenged before the domestic courts the finding issued on 1 December 2022 by the above-mentioned commission regarding whether he deserved his sentence to be commuted or (ii) applied directly to those courts for the commutation of his sentence, but had failed to do so; he had thus not exhausted the available domestic remedies.
28.  The applicant disputed each of these assertions.
29.  The Court notes that the Government’s objections and the arguments submitted in reply by the applicant are closely linked to the merits of the application. It therefore joins them to the merits and will examine them in the course of the examination on the merits.
30.  The Court notes that the application is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
Arguments of the parties
The applicant
31.  The applicant submitted that prior to the amendments of 18 October 2022 (which came into force on 9 November 2022) his situation had not been different to that examined by the Court in the case of Petukhov (no. 2) (cited above), in which it had been established that there was no practical and effective possibility of early release for life prisoners in Ukraine (ibid., §§ 169 to 187). In the applicant’s opinion, the same should hold true for the period between 9 November 2022 and 3 March 2023, when the newly adopted release on parole mechanism had not yet become operational.
32.  The applicant further maintained that even after the full implementation of the release on parole mechanism, it had not met the requirements of the Court’s case-law on the matter. The applicant submitted that the relevant case-law provided that a prisoner serving a life sentence should have a realistic opportunity of release after serving no more than twenty-five years’ imprisonment. Under the release on parole mechanism introduced in Ukraine, the minimum period of detention was twenty-six years and three months (corresponding to fifteen years of the original sentence, plus eleven years and three months – which constituted three quarters of the further fixed-term fifteen-year sentence that could be imposed as a result of commutation).
33.  The applicant argued that the release on parole mechanism was discriminatory as it did not take into account the situation of those life prisoners who had already served more than fifteen years of their respective sentences by the time the new system had become operational. Thus, in reality, the minimum sentence to be served by many life prisoners would be much longer than twenty-six years and three months, as the majority of persons sentenced to life imprisonment will have served more than fifteen years of their original sentence. The applicant himself had served at the time of the submission of his observations twenty-one years, eight months and four days of his life sentence; if the minimum further sentence of eleven years and three months were to be set for him, he would face a total of thirty-three years of imprisonment. However, under the domestic law the courts could fix a longer term of twenty years after the commutation of his original sentence. Given the life expectancy of those in detention due to poor conditions, the strict regime and a lack of medical assistance, the prospects of release for them remained non-existent. The applicant further submitted that the shortcomings of the new release on parole mechanism had been raised by national and international experts and that the release on parole mechanism introduced by the legislature did not comply with the decision of the Constitutional Court of 16 September 2021 as to the possibility of immediate release for a person convicted to life imprisonment without his or her life sentence being first replaced by a fixed-term sentence (see paragraph 10 above).
34.  The applicant further argued that the new system lacked predictability and was discretionary in nature. The methodology employed for assessing the degree to which a prisoner had reformed was confusing and operated with different terminology – “embarked on the path of reform” and “rehabilitated” for those who scored more than 61 points (see paragraph 19 above); moreover, it was not clear why for some prisoners attaining 61 points or more would simply release and for others only a commutation of their sentences. He further pointed to the statistical data according to which of 1,204 life prisoners only sixty-two had scored more than 61 points and only eight had succeeded in obtaining a positive court decision commuting their sentences to fixed terms of imprisonment. In the applicant’s opinion, those figures illustrated a lack of clarity and predictability in respect of this issue.
35.  The applicant further submitted that the two-step release on parole mechanism – which involved very long intervals between the two steps – had a negative impact on prisoners who employed it. The applicant pointed to the long timeframe involved – that is, prisoners only became eligible for release fifteen or twenty years after a court had taken into account the progress made towards reform: this led to a situation in which even if the judges found that the prisoner concerned was engaged in a positive dynamic, he was nevertheless confronted with only a very distant and hypothetical prospect of release. The applicant argued that instead of taking advantage of this favourable moment to construct a strategy for the prisoner’s reintegration into society, the system postponed the decision until a distant date, with nothing planned for the intervening period. Thus, rather than creating a tangible hope of release, this initial decision simply sent the prisoner back to serving a sentence of such a length that any plans for release were completely unrealistic.
36.  The applicant considered that the process of assessment conducted by prison authorities was completely arbitrary as they were not required to justify their assessment, and the person concerned had no involvement and did not have an opportunity to comment on it.
37.  The applicant also indicated that prison conditions were not conducive to the possibility of rehabilitation, and the prison authorities did not provide the conditions that could help detainees to demonstrate good behaviour and positive attitude to work that are criteria taken into account when assessing the reformation of prisoners.
38.  He noted that although a prisoner could seek presidential clemency after serving fifteen years of a life sentence under the amended Law (see paragraph 16 above), the process for seeking presidential clemency remained the same as before, and the Court’s findings in the Petukhov (no. 2) judgment (cited above) concerning its ineffectiveness were equally pertinent to the present case.
39.  The applicant considered that he could still claim to be a victim of a violation of his rights (as guaranteed by Article 3 of the Convention), as the new system did not comply with the requirements of the above-mentioned Article.
40.  Lastly, the applicant submitted that the Government had accused him of not informing the Court of the finding issued on 1 December 2022 by the above-mentioned commission (see paragraph 8 above). However, he pointed out that that finding had been approved only in January 2023; he suggested that the text of the assessment had been drawn up retrospectively. He also denied having been served with the finding in December 2022 and maintained that he had first read it in mid-August 2023. He saw in the Government’s actions a violation of Article 34 of the Convention, as in his opinion the Government had attempted to deprive him of the right to have his case examined by the Court. The authorities’ failure to acquaint him in a timely fashion with the contents of the commission’s above-mentioned finding, the falsification of the documents by the Government and the ineffectiveness of the new release on parole mechanism had also constituted reasons for the applicant not applying to the domestic courts for the commutation of his sentence.
The Government
41.  The Government submitted that the new system by which a life sentence could be commuted to a fixed-term sentence (with the additional possibility of early release) corresponded to the requirements established by the Court’s case-law; furthermore, the Government argued, the minimal total duration of twenty-six years and three months could be considered acceptable. They referred in particular to the Court’s judgment in the case of Bodein v. France (no. 40014/10, §§ 53 to 62, 13 November 2014), in which the possibility of a review of the applicant’s life sentence twenty-six years after his conviction had been found to be acceptable. The Government stressed that Ukrainian law clearly prescribed the procedure to be followed in respect of the commutation of a punishment with a relatively low threshold of the term of service of punishment in order for a prisoner to apply for the commutation of his sentence of life imprisonment to a fixed term of imprisonment.
42.  The Government also noted that the possibility to seek presidential clemency had not been annulled by the adoption of the legislative changes of 18 October 2022. Rather, the relevant legal provisions had been expanded to provide an alternative means of securing such a commutation; this had had a positive effect on the national legislation.
43.  As to the applicant’s allegations that the new procedure was ineffective, the Government maintained that the applicant had failed to inform the Court of his assessment by the prison commission in December 2022 (see paragraph 8 above). They submitted that rendering the new procedure fully operational had taken a certain amount of time as the secondary legislation had had to be amended accordingly, but that even prior to that the commission had assessed the applicant and had concluded that he had not scored enough points to be considered eligible to apply to a court for his sentence to be commuted to a less severe one. The Government referred to the fact that several persons had used the new release on parole mechanism effectively and that their terms of life imprisonment had been commuted to fixed terms of imprisonment. According to the Government, the absence of a positive outcome did not necessarily mean that the Convention had been violated; it had been open to the applicant to lodge an application for a domestic court to assess the material collected and produced by the commission and to apply directly to that court for the commutation of his life imprisonment. However, he had not followed that path.
44.  The Government further submitted that, although the Amendment Act of 18 October 2022 had come into force on 6 November 2022, the release on parole mechanism had only become fully operational on 19 January 2023, when the implementing Order of the Ministry of Justice (see paragraph 19 above) had been adopted. From that date the applicant had no longer been able to complain that his life sentence could not be reviewed.
45.  The Government accordingly concluded that there had been no violation of any of those of the applicant’s rights that were guaranteed by the Convention.
Appreciation of the Court
  Relevant principles concerning life sentences and rehabilitation and the prospect of release for life prisoners
46.  It is well established in the Court’s case-law that the imposition of a sentence of life imprisonment on an adult offender is not in itself prohibited by or incompatible with Article 3 or any other Article of the Convention, provided that it is not grossly disproportionate. However, the imposition of an irreducible life sentence on an adult may raise an issue under Article 3. A life sentence does not become irreducible by the mere fact that in practice it may be served in full. No issue arises under Article 3 if a life sentence is de jure and de facto reducible. A life sentence can remain compatible with Article 3 of the Convention only if there is both a prospect of release and a possibility of review – both of which must exist from the date of the imposition of the sentence (see Murray v. the Netherlands [GC], no. 10511/10, § 99, 26 April 2016, with further references).
47.  A prisoner cannot be detained unless there are legitimate penological grounds for incarceration, which include punishment, deterrence, public protection and rehabilitation. While many of these grounds will be present at the time a life sentence is imposed, the balance between these justifications for detention is not necessarily static and might shift in the course of the execution of the sentence. It is only by carrying out a review of the justification for continued detention at an appropriate point in the sentence, that these factors or shifts can be properly evaluated. The review required in order for a life sentence to be reducible should therefore allow the domestic authorities to consider whether, in the course of the sentence, any changes in the life prisoner and progress towards his or her rehabilitation are of such significance that continued detention is no longer justified on legitimate penological grounds. This assessment must be based on rules having a sufficient degree of clarity and certainty and the conditions laid down in domestic legislation must reflect the conditions set out in the Court’s case-law. Thus, the assessment must be based on objective, preestablished criteria. The prisoner’s right to a review entails an actual assessment of the relevant information, and the review must also be surrounded by sufficient procedural guarantees. To the extent necessary for the prisoner to know what he or she must do to be considered for release and under what conditions, it may be required that reasons be provided, and this should be safeguarded by access to judicial review. Lastly, in assessing whether the life sentence is reducible de facto it may be of relevance to take account of statistical information on previous use of the review mechanism in question (ibid., § 100, with further references).
48.  Furthermore, the review required in order for a life sentence to be reducible should permit the authorities to assess any changes in the life prisoner and any progress towards rehabilitation made by him or her. It would be incompatible with human dignity – which lies at the very essence of the Convention system – forcefully to deprive a person of his freedom without striving towards his rehabilitation and providing him with the chance to regain that freedom at some future date. Notwithstanding the fact that the Convention does not guarantee, as such, a right to rehabilitation, the Court’s case-law presupposes that convicted persons, including life prisoners, should be allowed to rehabilitate themselves. A life prisoner must be realistically enabled, to the extent possible within the constraints of the prison context, to make such progress towards rehabilitation that it offers him or her the hope of one day being eligible for parole or conditional release. This could be achieved, for example, by setting up and periodically reviewing an individualised programme that will encourage the sentenced prisoner to develop himself or herself to be able to lead a responsible and crime-free life (ibid., §§ 100 to 103, with further references).
49.  Although States are not responsible for achieving the rehabilitation of life prisoners, they nevertheless have a duty to make it possible for such prisoners to rehabilitate themselves. Were it otherwise, a life prisoner could in effect be denied the possibility of rehabilitation, with the consequence that the review required for a life sentence to be reducible, in which a life prisoner’s progress towards rehabilitation is to be assessed, might never be genuinely capable of leading to the commutation, remission or termination of the life sentence or to the conditional release of the prisoner. In this connection the Court reiterates the principle – well established in its caselaw – that the Convention is intended to guarantee rights that are not theoretical or illusory, but practical and effective. The obligation to offer a possibility of rehabilitation is to be seen as an obligation of means, not one of result (ibid., § 104, with further references).
50.  The Court has previously held that a State’s choice of criminal-justice system, including sentence review and release arrangements, is in principle outside the scope of the supervision carried out by the Court (see Harakchiev and Tolumov v. Bulgaria, nos. 15018/11 and 61199/12, § 250, ECHR 2014 (extracts)).
Application of those principles in the present case
51.  The Court considers that it should first answer the question regarding whether the above-mentioned legislative reform rendered life sentences in Ukraine de jure and de facto reducible, in line with the requirements of Article 3 of the Convention (see paragraphs 46 to 49 above).
52.  The Court notes that the amendments inserted into the criminal legislation a mechanism under which, after serving fifteen years of their original sentence, persons sentenced to life imprisonment could expect their sentence to be commuted to a fixed term of imprisonment that could further be reduced. The requirements to be met by prisoners in order for them to be eligible for such commutation and the procedure for the assessment of their reformation are set forth in the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraph 15 above) and are further detailed in the legal instruments issued by the Ministry of Justice (see paragraphs 18 to 20 above).
53.  In view of the fact that the States are in principle free to choose their own criminal-justice systems and while the introduced release on parole mechanism does not foresee the possibility of direct release from life imprisonment apart from through the commutation thereof by means of a court decision, such an approach to the possibility of reducing life sentences has been examined by the Court before and was found to be satisfactory (see Dardanskis and Others v. Lithuania (dec.), nos. 74452/13 and 15 others, § 26, 18 June 2019).
54.  It appears from the relevant legislation that a life prisoner can expect his life imprisonment to be commuted to a further fifteen to twenty years of imprisonment as early as the point at which that prisoner has served fifteen years of the original sentence (calculated furthermore from the start of the prisoner’s pre-trial detention and not from the date of imposition of a life sentence like in Bodein v. France (cited above, § 61)). It already provides the prisoner with the hope that in the event that he has engaged in good behaviour and shown signs of resocialisation, his or her original life sentence will be downgraded in practice to a fixed term of imprisonment of thirty years. Furthermore, if the prisoner remains on the path of reform, he or she can expect to be released after serving twenty-six years and three months of his or her original sentence (compare, ibid.). In the Court’s opinion such a system provides a life prisoner with a sufficiently defined procedure that offers a clear timeframe and indicates an attempt to achieve a proper balance between the interests of the person concerned and the society to which he or she strives to return.
55.  As to the applicant’s contention that confusion may arise from the fact that the assessment of a prisoner’s suitability for a reduction in his sentence is made according to the same criteria used to assess suitability for release on parole (see paragraph 34 above), the Court notes that that system allows for a uniformity of approach to the assessment of prisoners’ rehabilitation and reformation. When considered in conjunction with the relevant provisions of the Criminal Code and the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraphs 12 and 15 above), it appears clear that each assessment is conducted in order to determine whether the prisoner in question is ready for the commutation of his sentence or for early release – but not for both at the same time. Depending on the expected outcome, the two types of assessment can be arguably said to be focused on different questions: – namely, (i) the progress that a prisoner has made in reforming (which can lead to a commutation of his or her sentence), and (ii) the degree of a prisoner’s rehabilitation (which can lead to early release). A commission convened within a prison is not qualified (or indeed cannot be called on at that stage) to assess the suitability of a life prisoner for early release: the purpose of such an assessment is purely to determine the degree of rehabilitation that a life prisoner has achieved for the purpose of deciding whether to commute that prisoner’s life sentence to a fixed term of imprisonment – it is not to determine whether that prisoner has earned the right to an immediate early release. Therefore, it cannot be said that the contested methodology is confusing, misleading or insufficiently clear.
56.  The Court further notes that the provisions of Article 154 § 12 of the Code on the Execution of Sentences (see paragraph 15 above) state that the ultimate decision in all assessments of life prisoners’ suitability for a reduction in their sentence is taken by the domestic courts, which have jurisdiction to review in court proceedings any findings reached by prisons and to assess all material contained in a prisoner’s prison file. Such decisions are taken by three judges, with the participation of the prisoner in question and his or her lawyer (see paragraph 14 above).
57.  Lastly, the Court notes that the State has not overlooked the need for life prisoners to undergo continuous rehabilitation (including the application to them of enhanced social-rehabilitation measures) – even after a life sentence has been changed to a fixed-term sentence, with a view to possible release on parole and eventual reintegration into society (see paragraphs 15, 18 and 19 above; also see Harakchiev and Tolumov, cited above, § 245 in fine). The Court also considers this measure to be in conformity with the requirements set out by Article 3 of the Convention. It has already emphasised the States’ duty to make it possible for life prisoners to rehabilitate themselves (see Murray, cited above, § 104) and can only reiterate once again the importance of providing life prisoners with appropriate means and conditions for such rehabilitation (see paragraph 25 above).
58.  In the light of the above-noted considerations and the fact that some life prisoners have succeeded in securing the commutation of their life sentence to a fixed-term sentence (see paragraph 22 above), it could not be said that the system is not efficient in theory or in practice.
59.  As to the date from which the release on parole mechanism should be considered fully operational, the parties have agreed that the relevant primary legislation (even after its entry into force) has not proved to be sufficient and that the secondary legislation had to be awaited. They disagree, however, regarding the date on which the relevant legal instruments rendered the system fully operational. According to the Government, it was the date of the issuance of Order no. 294/5 of the Ministry of Justice – namely, 19 January 2023 (see paragraphs 18 and 44 above); according to the applicant it was 3 March 2023, when the relevant instructions for prisons were updated and the amending Order no. 631/5 of the Ministry of Justice entered into force to that end (see paragraphs 20 and 31 above). The Court in its turn cannot accept the date proposed by the Government, as the Order of 19 January 2023 had not been published and entered into effect by that date; rather, it was published and came into force only on 2 February 2023 (see paragraph 17 above). Furthermore, given that the domestic authorities themselves considered that it was further necessary to amend the instruction to prison personnel concerning the assessment of the degree to which life prisoners had been reformed, the Court considers that the release on parole mechanism only became fully operational on 3 March 2023.
60.  The Court considers that during the period between the applicant’s final sentencing to life imprisonment (on 2 October 2003) and the date on which the new release on parole mechanism became fully operational (3 March 2023) the applicant found himself in a situation of uncertainty, and there was a lack of any clear and realistic prospects of early release – in violation of Article 3 of the Convention (see Petukhov, cited above, §§ 16987). In the light of these findings the Court does not see any necessity to enter into an assessment of other complaints or allegations made by the parties with respect to the events and decisions that took place prior to 3 March 2023, including those which concerned admissibility (see paragraphs 27 and 28 above). The same holds true as regards the applicant’s allegations that he could not benefit (and could not have benefitted) from the minimum duration offered by the new system as he had already served more than fifteen years of his sentence, given the fact that his detention was in breach of Article 3 of the Convention, regardless of its length.
61.  The Court further considers that after 3 March 2023 the newly established release on parole mechanism offered the applicant the realistic opportunity to have his life sentence reviewed within the above-noted welldefined timeframe and under clear conditions. Thus, there was no violation of Article 3 of the Convention after that date.
II. APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
62.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
Damage
63.  The applicant claimed 7,000 euros (EUR) in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
64.  The Government considers that claim to be unsubstantiated.
65.  The Court notes that in cases in which a similar breach of Article 3 has been found concerning the possibility of reducing a life sentence it has considered that the finding of a violation constituted sufficient just satisfaction (see Petukhov v. Ukraine (no. 2), cited above, § 201). It sees no reason to depart from that practice as regards the instant case and considers that the finding of a violation constitutes sufficient just satisfaction in respect of any non-pecuniary damage caused to the applicant.
Costs and expenses
66.  The applicant also claimed EUR 3,975 for the costs and expenses incurred before the Court.
67.  The Government considers the claimed amount to be excessive and unsubstantiated.
68.  According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that these were actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to quantum. In the present case, the Court notes that the applicant received EUR 850 towards his legal expenses under the legal-aid scheme. Regard being had to the documents in its possession and the above-noted criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award the sum of EUR 3,125 covering costs for the proceedings before the Court, plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applicant.
