THE LAW
PRELIMINARY REMARKS
74.  The German Government asked for the application against Germany to be separated from the rest of the proceedings and for a separate decision to be issued on the admissibility of the application directed against Germany under Article 29 § 1, second sentence, of the Convention.
75.  Having regard to the facts of the case and the complaints against Germany and Greece, the Court rejects this request and examines the complaints against both Contracting Parties in one single judgment, as it had done in earlier cases concerning the removal from one Contracting State to another in which the applicants brought complaints against both States (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece [GC], no. 30696/09, ECHR 2011, and Sharifi and Others v. Italy and Greece, no. 16643/09, 21 October 2014).
76.  In the circumstances of the present case, the Court finds it appropriate to proceed by firstly examining the applicant’s complaints against Greece and then his complaints against Germany (see also M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, §§ 204 et seq., and Sharifi and Others, §§ 135 et seq., both cited above).
THE APPLICANT’S COMPLAINTS AGAINST GREECE
Alleged violation of Article 3 of the Convention
77.  The applicant alleged that the conditions of his detention in Greece following his return from Germany had amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 3 of the Convention, which reads:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”
Admissibility
78.  The Court notes that this complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
79.  The applicant contested the Greek Government’s submissions concerning his conditions of detention, and emphasised that he had been detained for a period of two months and seventeen days in places which, by their nature, were not suitable for prolonged detention. He added that he had been detained in both Leros police station and a container in the Leros Reception and Identification Centre, and that his detention had started on 9 September 2018 (see paragraph 23 above).
80.  The Government submitted that the conditions in Leros police station from 10 September to 27 November 2018 had not amounted to inhuman treatment or punishment.
81.  The Court notes that the parties were not in agreement as to the place of the applicant’s detention. It notes that according to a document submitted by the Government and issued by the police director of the Dodecanese, the applicant was detained in Leros police station at the material time (see paragraph 26 above). The Court has no reason to doubt the authenticity of that document or the accuracy of the information contained therein. It therefore considers that the applicant was detained in Leros police station from 10 September to 27 November 2018.
82.  The Court notes that it has on many occasions examined the conditions of detention in police stations in Greece of persons remanded or detained pending expulsion, and has found them to be in breach of Article 3 of the Convention (see Siasios and Others v. Greece, no. 30303/07, 4 June 2009; Vafiadis v. Greece, no. 24981/07, 2 July 2009; Shuvaev v. Greece, no. 8249/07, 29 October 2009; Tabesh v. Greece, no. 8256/07, 26 November 2009; Efremidi v. Greece, no. 33225/08, 21 June 2011; Aslanis v. Greece, no. 36401/10, 17 October 2013; Adamantidis v. Greece, no. 10587/10, 17 April 2014; Kavouris and Others v. Greece, no. 73237/12, 17 April 2014; and S.Z. v. Greece, no. 66702/13, 21 June 2018). There were specific deficiencies in the applicants’ detention conditions in each of the above cases, particularly overcrowding, a lack of outdoor space for exercise, poor sanitary conditions and poor-quality food. In addition to those specific deficiencies, the Court based its findings of a violation of Article 3 on the nature of police stations per se, which are places designed to accommodate people for a short time only. Detention in a police station lasting one to three months was thus considered to be contrary to Article 3 (see Siasios and Others, § 32; Vafiadis, §§ 35-36; Shuvaev, § 39; Tabesh, § 43; Efremidi, § 41; Aslanis § 39; Adamantidis § 33; and Kavouris and Others, § 38, all cited above).
83.  Turning to the present case, the Court notes that the applicant was detained for a period of two months and seventeen days in Leros police station, a facility which, in terms of its design, lacked the amenities required for prolonged periods of detention.
84.  Having regard to its case-law on the subject and the material submitted by the parties, the Court notes that the Government did not put forward any fact or argument capable of persuading it to reach a different conclusion in the present case from the one it reached in the above-cited cases.
85.  There has accordingly been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention.
Alleged violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention
86.  The applicant complained that his detention in Greece had been arbitrary, in breach of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention, the relevant parts of which read as follows:
“1.  Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:
...
(f)  the lawful arrest or detention of a person to prevent his effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a person against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.”
Admissibility
87.  The Court notes that this complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
The applicant
88.  The applicant submitted that his detention had not been in line with national legislation because (i) his status as an asylum-seeker had not been taken into consideration by the authorities, and (ii) the legal basis for his detention had been incorrect. Had the procedure under the Dublin III Regulation (see paragraph 61 above) been followed – a procedure which the German and Greek authorities had circumvented by applying the administrative arrangement they had concluded (see paragraph 15 above), thus depriving him of the guarantees provided for by EU law – the Greek authorities would have been obliged under domestic law to revoke the decision to discontinue the examination of his asylum application and instead continue the examination of that application (see paragraph 51 above). He had thus remained an asylum-seeker until 17 September 2018, when the decision to reject his application for the continuation of the asylum proceedings had become final (see paragraph 24 above). Therefore, his detention had been ordered contrary to the “procedure prescribed by national law”, as his status as an asylum-seeker had not been taken into consideration, and the legal basis for his detention had been incorrect, as Law no. 3907/2011 was not applicable to asylum-seekers and Article 46 of Law no. 4375/2016 (see paragraph 50 above) should have been applied in his case.
89.  The applicant further argued that his detention with a view to examining his asylum application had exceeded the reasonable required period, taking into consideration the precise legal obligations of the Greek authorities: as his asylum application of 21 September was subject to the fasttrack border procedure, its examination should have been concluded within two weeks in accordance with domestic legislation. In addition, while an EASO expert had identified him as a person belonging to a vulnerable group and had concluded on 12 October 2018 that he should be exempted from the relevant border procedure (see paragraph 31 above), the Asylum Service had not referred his application to the regular asylum procedure until 23 November 2018, and he had not been released until 27 November 2018 (see paragraph 34 above). Moreover, alternative measures to detention had not been examined, contrary to the requirement under domestic law to do so. Lastly, the place and conditions of his detention had not been appropriate.
The Government
90.  The Government argued that the applicant’s arrest and detention had taken place in the context of his administrative removal, i.e. to ensure the execution of the removal decision against him, in accordance with Articles 76 and 83 of Law no. 3386/2005 (see paragraph 49 above). Detention had been necessary and proportionate to the aim pursued, as the applicant had not had travel documents or a stable place of residence, and he had been detained for the shortest possible time, that is, for two months and seventeen days.
The third-party interveners
91.  In their joint submissions, the AIRE Centre, the European Council on Refugees and Exiles (“ECRE”) and the Dutch Council for Refugees submitted that, in the light of the obligations of EU member States under EU law, including the recast Reception Conditions Directive and Article 53 of the Convention, the detention of asylum-seekers falling within the scope of that Directive would be unlawful and arbitrary where it was imposed automatically. In the light of the applicable EU and international law, the consideration of less intrusive alternatives to detention was required to prevent arbitrary detention, including in the context of immigration control. Where there was no such consideration and detention was not a measure of last resort, it was arbitrary. Detention decisions needed to consider the individual’s personal circumstances, and procedures needed to be individualised to identify vulnerability and prevent detention where it might not be safe or appropriate.
The Court’s assessment
92.  It is not disputed that the applicant’s placement in detention amounted to a “deprivation of liberty”, and that his arrest and detention fell within the ambit of Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention, as the applicant was detained with a view to deportation.
93.  Applying the relevant general principles as summarised in S.Z. v. Greece (cited above, §§ 53-54) to the present case, the Court notes firstly that the decision of 4 September 2018 to detain the applicant referred to Laws nos. 3386/2005, 3907/2011 and 4375/2016 as the basis for his deprivation of liberty. According to the same decision, there was a risk of absconding, the applicant lacked the necessary documents, and he was dangerous for public order (paragraph 21 above). Given that there was an expulsion decision of 4 July 2018 against the applicant (see paragraph 6 above), and that Article 46 of Law no. 4375/2016 allowed for the detention of asylum-seekers subject to an administrative expulsion decision in certain circumstances (see paragraph 50 above), the Court sees no reason to doubt that the applicant’s detention was in compliance with the letter of the national law, even if the applicant were considered to be an asylum-seeker when his detention was ordered on 4 September 2018.
94.  There are no elements in the file that could cast doubt on the authorities’ good faith when ordering the applicant’s detention pending expulsion. The detention was also closely connected to the grounds of detention relied on by the Government.
95.  Turning to the length of the detention, the Court observes that the applicant was detained for a period of two months and twenty-three days, that is from 4 September to 27 November 2018. It considers that such a period of detention cannot in principle be considered excessive, taking into account the administrative formalities that had to be completed before the applicant’s expulsion could take place.
96.  As far as the asylum application is concerned, the Court notes that in accordance with national law, if such an application suspends the execution of an expulsion, it does not suspend that of detention. Therefore, even assuming that the domestic authorities should have considered the applicant an asylum-seeker for part of his detention, this would not have had any effect on the decision to detain him (see R.T. v. Greece, no. 5124/11, § 88, 11 February 2016).
97.  With respect to the conditions of detention at the police station where the applicant was detained the Court has already found a violation of Article 3 (see paragraphs 81-85 above). It therefore does not consider it necessary to address this aspect again under Article 5 § 1 (f) (see, for example, Ha.A. v. Greece, no. 58387/11, § 41, 21 April 2016, and R.T. v. Greece, cited above, § 85, with further references).
98.  Having regard to the foregoing (paragraphs 93-96 above), the Court considers that the applicant’s detention was justified under Article 5 § 1 (f) of the Convention. Therefore and for the reason outlined above (see paragraph 97), the Court finds that there has not been a violation of Article 5 § 1 of the Convention (see R.T. v. Greece, § 89, and Ha.A. v. Greece, §§ 42-43, both cited above).
Alleged violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention
99.  The applicant further complained that he had not had at his disposal an effective remedy by which he could challenge the lawfulness of his detention, as provided for by Article 5 § 4 of the Convention, which reads as follows:
“Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.”
Admissibility
100.  The Court notes that this complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
101.  The applicant submitted that in the present case the objections lodged against his detention (see paragraphs 27 and 32 above) had not constituted an effective remedy, as his specific allegations concerning the conditions of his detention had not been examined in the context of those proceedings. In two decisions (see paragraphs 30 and 33 above), the president of the administrative tribunal of Rhodes had rejected the allegations without a thorough examination, without giving adequate reasons and on the basis of a formulaic decision.
102.  The Government argued that the applicant had had an effective remedy at his disposal to complain of the legality of his detention, as the applicable law at the time had allowed a national judge to examine all aspects of the legality of his detention. The president of the administrative tribunal of Rhodes had examined the applicant’s allegations very thoroughly and had rejected them. The applicant’s allegations concerning his conditions of detention had been rejected as vague and unsubstantiated. The fact that the applicant’s objections had been rejected did not automatically entail a violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
The third-party interveners
103.  In their joint submissions, the AIRE Centre, the ECRE and the Dutch Council for Refugees submitted that effective judicial review of detention was an essential safeguard against arbitrary detention, including in the context of immigration control. In E.A. v. Greece (no. 74308/10, § 97, 30 July 2015) the Court had found a violation of Article 5 § 4 owing to the domestic judge’s rejection of the applicant’s objections to his detention without any consideration of his asylum application or any examination of his conditions of detention.
The Court’s assessment
104.  As regards the general principles governing the application of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention in cases raising similar issues to those raised in the present case, the Court refers to its relevant case-law on the subject (see, in particular, Dougoz v. Greece, no. 40907/98, § 61, ECHR 2001II; S.D. v. Greece, no. 53541/07, § 72, 11 June 2009; Herman and Serazadishvili v. Greece, nos. 26418/11 and 45884/11, § 71, 24 April 2014; and S.Z. v. Greece, cited above, § 68). In particular, Article 5 § 4 does not impose an obligation on a court examining an appeal against detention to address every argument contained in the appellant’s submissions. However, the court cannot treat as irrelevant, or disregard, concrete facts which are relied on by the detainee and are capable of putting into doubt the existence of the conditions essential for the “lawfulness”, in the sense of the Convention, of the deprivation of liberty (see Nikolova v. Bulgaria [GC], no. 31195/96, § 61, ECHR 1999II).
105.  The Court notes at the outset that under Article 76 §§ 4 and 5 of Law no. 3386/2005, as amended by Article 55 § 2 of Law no. 3900/2010, the administrative judge responsible for examining the objections lodged by a person who has been detained with a view to being expelled is no longer limited to examining only whether the detainee posed a danger to public order or was a flight risk; the judge can now “object to the detention” and thus examine any issue arising from the detention, including a detainee’s specific and substantiated allegations relating to his state of health and age, and those relating to overcrowding, the conditions justifying the detention, and the possibility of accommodating the person concerned in a place where the authorities can find him. When appropriate, that judge orders the release of the detainee in question or his transfer to a detention centre offering better conditions of detention (see MD v. Greece, no. 60622/11, § 65, 13 November 2014, and S.Z. v. Greece, cited above, § 69).
106.  The Court observes that in the present case the competent administrative tribunal rejected the applicant’s objections against his detention twice. As regards the examination of the conditions of the applicant’s detention, the competent tribunal did not examine the substance of those allegations. On the first occasion, on 11 October 2018 the president of the administrative tribunal of Rhodes considered that the applicant had not proved his allegations concerning the conditions of his detention (paragraph 30 above). In the second decision dated 16 November 2018, the president of that tribunal noted once again that the applicant had not proved his allegations concerning the conditions of his detention (paragraph 33 above).
107.  However, in his objections against his detention, the applicant had described in detail the conditions of his detention, submitted that those conditions were contrary to Article 3 of the Convention, and invoked the Court’s case-law on the matter (paragraphs 27 and 32 above).
108.  The Court considers that the amendment of Article 76 of Law no. 3386/2005 (see paragraph 105 above) serves to reinforce the guarantees of which foreigners detained with a view to expulsion should have the benefit. However, the Court finds that in the present case, the applicant did not have the benefit of an examination of the legality of his detention which was as thorough as that provided for in the amended version of paragraph 5 of Article 76, especially since the complaint mainly concerned his conditions of detention, in relation to which the Court had already found violations in similar cases. In the Court’s view, such a complaint certainly deserved a reply from the authorities (see, mutatis mutandis, G.B. and Others v. Turkey, no. 4633/15, §§ 175-76, 17 October 2019).
109.  There has accordingly been a violation of Article 5 § 4 of the Convention.
THE APPLICANT’S COMPLAINTS AGAINST GERMANY
Alleged violation of Article 3 of the Convention on account of the applicant’s removal to Greece
110.  The applicant complained that his removal from Germany to Greece had been contrary to Article 3 of the Convention for two reasons. Firstly, he had been removed without his asylum application being registered by the German authorities and without an assessment of the risk of chain refoulement from Greece to Türkiye and ultimately to his country of origin, Syria. Secondly, he had been removed to Greece without the German authorities assessing the risk of him being detained in Greece in conditions in breach of Article 3, and without any individual guarantees being obtained as regards the treatment which he would face in Greece, despite there being substantial grounds to believe that he would be detained in conditions contrary to Article 3.
Admissibility
The parties’ arguments
The Government
111.  The German Government submitted that the applicant had not exhausted domestic remedies, contrary to the requirement of Article 35 § 1 of the Convention. To start with, the applicant had made incomplete and partially false statements concerning the circumstances of his examination by German police officers on 4 September 2018. In reality, he had been informed of his rights by German police officers on several occasions, including in Arabic, and could easily have had access to the services of a lawyer, as set out in the Government’s version of the facts (see paragraphs 12-14 above). It was only the refusal of entry for asylum-seekers that could not be handed to the applicant in Arabic or in the presence of an interpreter; owing to an oversight by the police officers involved, this had to be explained to him in English (see paragraph 16 above). However, this did not alter the fact that he had received information in a language he could understand indicating that he had been refused entry and that he was entitled to take legal action against that decision. The same held true with regard to his right to contact a lawyer. However, he had not requested the assistance of a lawyer. Instead, he had agreed to make himself available for voluntary return (see paragraph 13 in fine above). While an action against the return decision before the administrative courts would not have had automatic suspensive effect, the applicant could have asked an administrative court to grant suspensive effect (see section 80(5) of the Administrative Courts Act, quoted in paragraph 55 above).
112.  In any event, the applicant could pursue an effective remedy following his return to Greece, and had in fact done so by initiating proceedings before the German administrative courts (see paragraph 40 above). Those proceedings concerning the refusal of entry which had purportedly been in violation of his rights under the Convention constituted an effective remedy. They allowed the court dealing with the matter to determine the lawfulness of the measures and whether there had been a violation of the applicant’s rights under Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention. If it were established in those proceedings that the applicant’s rights under the Convention had been violated, he could subsequently claim damages in proceedings on State liability before civil courts. When initiating those proceedings, the applicant had failed to comply with the relevant time-limit under domestic law, which in itself meant that the present application was inadmissible. Even assuming that his application for restitutio in integrum were granted, the present application would be inadmissible, as the matter had still been pending before the domestic courts when the applicant had lodged his application with the Court on 1 March 2019, which was the relevant point in time for assessing whether domestic remedies had been exhausted. Moreover, the applicant could have applied for interim relief under section 123(1) of the Administrative Courts Act (see paragraph 55 above) and asked the relevant administrative court to oblige the Federal Police to bring him back to Germany at their own expense and to allow him entry into Germany on a provisional basis, as other applicants had done in the past following their return from Germany to Greece (see paragraph 65 above). Lastly, the applicant had failed to lodge a constitutional complaint with the Federal Constitutional Court, which he would have been required to do in order to exhaust domestic remedies. Before that court, he could also have requested a preliminary injunction.
113.  Lastly, it could be considered an abuse of the right of individual application within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention that the applicant had alleged that no effective remedy was available to him in Germany and had failed to inform the Court that he was simultaneously pursuing administrative court proceedings in Germany.
The applicant
114.  The applicant emphasised that he had expressed his wish to apply for asylum in Germany to the German police officers; however, the German authorities had never registered his asylum application and had not followed the procedures provided for by EU law, depriving him of access to an effective remedy and the opportunity to explain in detail why he objected to being transferred to Greece. He had never agreed to make himself available for voluntary return (see paragraph 17 above).
115.  He had been informed of the initial decision refusing him entry during his questioning as an accused at the police station. At that stage, he had received contradictory information. Firstly, he had been informed orally that he had been refused entry and that he was to be returned to Greece. No information on access to a lawyer or available legal remedies had been provided. A written decision on the refusal of entry under the Schengen Borders Code had also been given to him, together with an information note in Arabic regarding the refusal of entry. Contrary to the oral information he had already received, the written information had mentioned that he would be returned to Austria (see paragraph 18 above). The same document informing him of his return to Austria had mentioned his right to lodge an appeal with the Munich police headquarters. No information on legal assistance had been provided in this note. Shortly before he had been due to depart for the airport, the legal basis of his removal had been changed and he had been issued with a refusal of entry for asylum-seekers. The content of that latter decision and information about the legal remedy against it (an appeal to the Munich Administrative Court) had not been explained to him in any language, and certainly not Arabic, which was the only language he understood. No information on legal assistance had been provided in either of the two decisions refusing him entry which had been served on him, or in the information note in Arabic that had been given to him. He had only been informed that he could have access to a lawyer in connection with the criminal proceedings against him, and had asked to be assisted by a lawyer in connection with those criminal proceedings, but had never been put in contact with one. The whole return procedure had been carried out very hastily. He had remained in Germany for only a few hours, as he had been arrested at 5.15 a.m. on 4 September 2018 and had returned to Greece at 7.20 p.m. the same day (see paragraph 20 above). During those hours, he had firstly been taken to Passau police station, where he had been questioned by police for about two hours, and later he had been transferred to the airport, which was located more than a ninety-minute drive away. In practice, it had been impossible for him to lodge an appeal against the decision ordering his removal to Greece prior to his removal. The applicant added that he could not have lodged a constitutional complaint prior to his removal for the same reasons.
116.  Besides having been unavailable to him in practice, the existing remedy under domestic law against decisions refusing entry for asylumseekers did not have automatic suspensive effect (the applicant referred to sections 18, 74(1) and 75(1) of the Asylum Act – see paragraph 54 above) and thus did not meet the requirements of an effective remedy under Article 13 of the Convention, given that he had had an arguable claim that his removal would breach Article 3. The possibility to apply to the competent administrative court for suspensive effect had not been mentioned in the decision on refusal of entry.
117.  In so far as the Government had referred to the applicant being able to apply for interim relief under section 123(1) of the Administrative Courts Act and ask a domestic court to oblige the German authorities to bring him back to Germany (see paragraph 112 above), the applicant emphasised that in the present application he had complained of violations which had occurred prior to his removal to Greece and of the circumstances of that removal. The remedy referred to by the Government was not a remedy that could prevent the removal which had already occurred, and did not relate to the violations alleged in the present application. It could not grant appropriate relief and was not effective for the purposes of the complaints raised. For the same reason, the proceedings he had initiated before the Munich Administrative Court after being removed to Greece (see paragraph 40 above), which were still pending when he lodged the present application with the Court, were irrelevant for the assessment of the Convention violations he had alleged in the present application, and it did not constitute an abuse of the right of individual application that he had not mentioned those irrelevant proceedings in his application form. In his subsequent submissions in response to the Court’s request for information on the developments in those proceedings, the applicant noted, with reference to those proceedings, that he had not received effective protection promptly.
The third-party interveners
118.  The AIRE Centre, the ECRE and the Dutch Council for Refugees made joint submissions, as did the European Center for Constitutional and Human Rights (“ECCHR”), Pro Asyl and Refugee Support Aegean. All the interveners emphasised that for a remedy in Article 3 removal cases to be effective, it had to have automatic suspensive effect. The ECCHR, Pro Asyl and Refugee Support Aegean submitted that none of the remedies available under German law against decisions on refusal of entry had automatic suspensive effect. All the interveners asserted that for a remedy to be effective, it had to be accessible in practice, and they emphasised the importance of access to an interpreter, to a lawyer and to information as to the procedure to be followed.
The Court’s assessment
Whether the applicant waived his rights
119.  The Court takes note of the Government’s submission that the applicant agreed to make himself available for voluntary return to Greece when he was questioned at Passau police station (see paragraphs 13 and 111 above). Even assuming that the rights guaranteed by Article 3 of the Convention can be waived at all, such as by a person agreeing to make himself available for voluntary return (in this regard, see Akkad v. Turkey, no. 1557/19, § 74, 21 June 2022; M.A. v. Belgium, no. 19656/18, §§ 60-61, 27 October 2020; and M.S. v. Belgium, no. 50012/08, §§ 121-25, 31 January 2012), the Court reiterates that for a waiver to be effective for Convention purposes, it must be established in an unequivocal manner and be attended by minimum safeguards commensurate to its importance; it must be voluntary and constitute a knowing and intelligent relinquishment of a right (see, more generally, Murtazaliyeva v. Russia [GC], no. 36658/05, § 117, 18 December 2018). In the present case, it has not even been established that the applicant agreed to make himself available for voluntary return to Greece, given that he asserted that he had never consented to this (see paragraphs 17 and 114 above) and that no evidence – in the form of a signed voluntary return form, for example – was submitted to the Court (compare and contrast Akkad, § 74, and M.A. v. Belgium, § 29, both cited above). This is sufficient for the Court to conclude that the applicant did not waive his rights under Article 3 of the Convention.
Exhaustion of domestic remedies
General principles
120.  The Court reiterates that in removal cases, the criteria for determining whether a remedy is effective for the purposes of Article 13, taken together with Article 3 of the Convention, are the same as those relating to the question of the effectiveness of remedies which have to be exhausted for the purposes of Article 35 § 1 of the Convention in asylum cases (see A.M. v. the Netherlands, no. 29094/09, § 66, 5 July 2016; for the general principles concerning exhaustion of domestic remedies, see Communauté genevoise d’action syndicale (CGAS) v. Switzerland [GC], no. 21881/20, §§ 138-45, 27 November 2023). The accessibility of a remedy in practice is decisive when assessing its effectiveness (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, § 318, and Akkad, cited above, § 80). In the case of asylum-seekers and persons to be removed, elements to be taken into account when determining whether a remedy was accessible in practice include the access, or lack thereof, to the necessary information about the procedures to be followed and about their rights in a language they understood, and the opportunity, or lack thereof, to have access to an interpreter and a lawyer (see D v. Bulgaria, no. 29447/17, § 132-33, 20 July 2021; Akkad, cited above, § 80; Hirsi Jamaa and Others v. Italy [GC], no. 27765/09, §§ 202-05, ECHR 2012; and Sharifi and Others, cited above, §§ 167-69 and 177). Moreover, the hasty implementation of a removal order can render existing remedies inaccessible in practice and therefore not effective (see D v. Bulgaria, cited above, § 134).
121.  Lastly, with regard to the usefulness of continuing proceedings to have an order to leave the country set aside even after an applicant’s transfer, the Court has previously stated that it failed to see how a subsequent decision in that regard, without suspensive effect, could still offer the applicant suitable redress even if it contained a finding of a violation of Article 3 (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, §§ 388 and 393).
Application of these principles to the present case
122.  The Court notes that during the check carried out by the German police near the German-Austrian border, the applicant initially tried to identify himself using a Bulgarian identity card reported stolen and issued to a different person, and that he told the police officers that he had bought the identity card in Greece from a person he did not know (see the Government’s version of events at paragraph 11 above, which is not disputed by the applicant in this regard). The Court reiterates that States’ concern to foil the increasingly frequent attempts to circumvent immigration controls is legitimate, but cannot go so far as to render ineffective the protection afforded by the Convention, in particular Article 3 of the Convention (see N.D. and N.T. v. Spain [GC], nos. 8675/15 and 8697/15, § 184, 13 February 2020).
123.  It is not in dispute between the parties that the applicant expressed his wish to apply for asylum in Germany when he was questioned at Passau police station (see paragraphs 13 and 17 above). Indeed, the German authorities informed the Greek authorities that the applicant had expressed a desire for international protection in Germany, and the administrative arrangement between Germany and Greece, under which the applicant was removed to Greece, only applied to persons who had expressed a wish to apply for international protection in Germany (see paragraphs 15 and 63 above). The order on refusal of entry, on the basis of which the applicant was ultimately returned to Greece, was based on section 18(2) point 2 of the Asylum Act and relied on the consideration that under the Dublin III Regulation, Greece was responsible for processing the applicant’s asylum application (see paragraphs 16 and 54 above).
124.  The Court observes that the said order was served on the applicant shortly before his departure for the airport to be returned to Greece, and it is not in dispute that it was not given to him in Arabic, which he claimed was the only language he understood, and that no interpreter was present at the time (see paragraphs 16, 19, 111 and 115 above). He was also not assisted by a lawyer during the short period of time which he spent on German territory (see paragraphs 12-13, 17, 111 and 115 above). In so far as the Government submitted that the applicant had earlier been informed, in Arabic, that he had been refused entry and that he was entitled to take legal action against that decision (see paragraph 111 above), the Court cannot but note that the first decision refusing him entry, which was issued to the applicant in Arabic, relied on a different legal basis, indicated a different country to which he was to be removed (Austria instead of Greece) and stated that an appeal against the decision was to be lodged with the Munich police headquarters rather than the Munich Administrative Court, within a different time-limit (one month instead of two weeks – see paragraphs 14, 16, 18 and 115 above). In the decision discontinuing the proceedings which the applicant had initiated after his removal to Greece, the Munich Administrative Court similarly noted that the applicant had been provided with incorrect information about the legal remedy to be pursued, in view of the two decisions refusing him entry which had been served on him and which had contained wholly contradictory information in this regard (see paragraph 48 above). In the light of the foregoing, the Court concludes that prior to being returned to Greece, the applicant did not have access to an effective remedy in practice.
125.  In so far as the Government referred to different remedies which the applicant could pursue before German courts after being returned to Greece (see paragraph 112 above), the Court reiterates that a subsequent decision, even if it contained a finding of a violation of Article 3, could not offer the applicant suitable redress for the violation alleged in the present case (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, § 388 and 393, and Hirsi Jamaa and Others, § 206, both cited above).
126.  It follows that the Government’s objection concerning the nonexhaustion of domestic remedies must be dismissed.
Abuse of the right of individual application
127.  The Court reiterates that a failure on the part of an applicant to inform it at the outset of a fact essential for the examination of the case could, in principle, lead to the application being declared inadmissible for abuse of the right of application within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention. In order for the Court to reach such a conclusion, the misleading information should concern the very core of the case. Moreover, an intention to mislead the Court must always be established with sufficient certainty (see Belošević v. Croatia (dec.), no. 57242/13, § 47, 3 December 2019, with further references).
128.  Reiterating that a remedy pursued after his return to Greece could not offer the applicant suitable redress for the alleged violation of Article 3 of the Convention (see paragraph 125 above), the Court concludes that the applicant’s failure to inform the Court about the proceedings he had initiated before the German administrative courts after being returned to Greece (see paragraph 40 above) did not amount to an abuse of the right of application within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention. At the same time, it considers that the applicant should have informed the Court, on his own initiative, as required by Rule 47 § 7 of the Rules of Court, about the subsequent developments in those proceedings (see paragraphs 43-48 above), given that the Government had argued that he had not exhausted domestic remedies because those proceedings had been pending when he had lodged the present application with the Court (see paragraph 112 above).
Conclusion
129.  The Court further observes that the complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention, nor inadmissible on any other grounds. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
The parties’ submissions
The applicant
130.  The applicant submitted that despite his express statement made to the German police officers indicating that he wanted to seek international protection in Germany (see paragraph 17 above), his asylum application had not been registered by the German authorities. Instead, the German authorities had removed him to Greece within a few hours of his arrest, without assessing (i) whether there were sufficient guarantees in Greece that he would be protected against refoulement, and (ii) the risk of him being detained in Greece in conditions in breach of Article 3; the authorities had also removed him without obtaining any individual guarantees as regards the treatment which he would face in Greece, despite there being substantial grounds for believing that he would be detained in conditions contrary to Article 3. As the German authorities had not registered his asylum application, he had not had the opportunity to explain in detail why he objected to being transferred to Greece. The German authorities had been under an obligation to assess these risks of their own motion, prior to removing him. He pointed out that a number of reliable sources, which the German authorities had known about or should have known about, had revealed that there were substantial grounds for believing that systemic deficiencies in the Greek asylum system persisted. Those deficiencies had concerned, in particular, the fast-track border procedure used to process his (first) asylum application in Greece, owing to the absence of an individual assessment of each case in that procedure, as it was applied to asylum-seekers entering Greece from Türkiye, and Türkiye was considered to be a “safe third country” in that procedure. Using that procedure to process an asylum application thus entailed a high risk of refoulement to Türkiye, where, in turn, there were no sufficient safeguards for Syrians against refoulement to Syria. He had managed to lodge another asylum application in Greece after being removed to that country (see paragraph 25 above), and eventually the regular asylum procedure had been used to process that application after he had been identified as a person belonging to a vulnerable group (see paragraph 34 above); however, that did not exempt the German authorities from their obligations under Article 3.
131.  The applicant added that it had been foreseeable that he, like any other asylum-seeker subject to a “geographical limitation” measure on Leros island (see paragraph 7 above), would be detained if found off that island and then transferred back there for further detention, given that a police circular in force at the relevant time had set out these measures. There had been no dedicated detention facility in Leros for foreign nationals, and it had been foreseeable that he would be detained in a police station in conditions in breach of Article 3. Indeed, he had been detained upon his arrival in Athens from Germany, and transferred back to Leros (see paragraphs 21 and 23 above), where he had remained in detention for two months and seventeen days in facilities which, by their nature, did not comply with Article 3. The German authorities had been obliged to obtain sufficient guarantees that he would not be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 in Greece, prior to removing him.
132.  Referring to the Recommendation of the European Commission of 8 December 2016 (see paragraph 62 above), he added that asylum-seekers at the relevant time could be returned to Greece on the basis of the Dublin III Regulation only if the Greek authorities provided individual guarantees to the German authorities. As a vulnerable person, he should have enjoyed further guarantees. Indeed, that Recommendation provided for vulnerable individuals being exempt from transfers to Greece. The administrative arrangement between Germany and Greece, on the basis of which he had been returned within a few hours of his arrest, circumvented the procedure and safeguards provided for by the Dublin III Regulation, in that it provided for a fast-track procedure to return persons wishing to seek international protection in Germany to Greece, without the registration of asylum applications in Germany, contrary to obligations under EU law, among other things.
The Government
133.  The Government did not make observations on the merits of the application, beyond the points they raised in respect of its admissibility (see paragraphs 111-113 above).
The third-party interveners
134.  All the interveners asserted that before removing an asylum-seeker to a third, intermediary country, the authorities of the removing State had to assess, of their own motion and prior to the removal, whether the individual would have access to an adequate asylum procedure in the receiving third country or whether he risked direct or indirect refoulement, and whether living and detention conditions in the receiving third country were compatible with Article 3 of the Convention, including where the receiving third country was a EU member State (they relied, in particular, on Ilias and Ahmed v. Hungary [GC], no. 47287/15, 21 November 2019). The ECCHR, Pro Asyl and Refugee Support Aegean emphasised that the obligation to assess the conditions in the receiving country existed regardless of whether the individual to be removed had relied on and substantiated relevant individual circumstances as to such a risk (they relied on M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, § 366). The AIRE Centre, the ECRE and the Dutch Council for Refugees added that it could never be sufficient to merely rely on a bilateral agreement, particularly when deficiencies in the asylum system of the receiving third country were known to the authorities or ought to have been known to them, including through publicly available information from reputable sources. The ECCHR, Pro Asyl and Refugee Support Aegean added that the deficiencies in the Greek asylum system were long-standing and documented in publicly available information, including the practice of detaining asylum-seekers in poor conditions. They added that the number of transfers of asylum-seekers from Germany to Greece under the Dublin III Regulation following the resumption of such transfers had remained low, and that at the relevant time a number of such transfers had been suspended by German administrative courts on account of their incompatibility with Article 3 of the Convention, owing to lasting systemic deficiencies in the Greek asylum system.
135.  The AIRE Centre, the ECRE and the Dutch Council for Refugees submitted that in Tarakhel v. Switzerland ([GC], no. 29217/12, ECHR 2014 (extracts)) the Court had found that it had been incumbent on the authorities of the removing State to obtain an individual assurance from the receiving State regarding the applicants’ reception conditions following their transfer, as the possibility that asylum-seekers transferred under the (then) Dublin II Regulation would be left in inadequate reception conditions in the receiving State had not been unfounded. Those interveners submitted that the considerations and standards which had led to that finding should apply in the context of detention conditions. They added that general assurances could not be relied on in relation to countries where the number of people in need of protection was higher than the capacity of the asylum system, or where inadequate reception conditions and deficiencies in the asylum system prevailed. The ECCHR, Pro Asyl and Refugee Support Aegean added that it needed to be examined whether any assurances which were obtained were specific enough, individually framed and had relevant information about the situation in practice.
136.  Lastly, all the interveners submitted that the administrative arrangement between Germany and Greece was in breach of EU law, notably because it circumvented the procedures and safeguards provided for by the Dublin III Regulation.
The Court’s assessment
General principles
137.  Ilias and Ahmed (cited above, §§ 128-41) concerned the removal of asylum-seekers whose asylum applications had been declared inadmissible by the authorities of the removing State because they had arrived from a neighbouring State, to which they had been removed, and the removing State had designated that neighbouring non-EU State a “safe third country” in its legislation. In that case, the Court set out the relevant principles under Article 3 of the Convention in cases concerning the removal of asylumseekers to third intermediary countries which were not members of the European Union without an assessment by the authorities of the removing State of the merits of the asylum claim. The Court subsequently also applied these principles to cases in which applicants who had sought to lodge an asylum application with border officials and/or communicated fear for their safety to them had been denied entry to the territory in question and removed in a summary manner to a third country outside the European Union (see M.K. and Others v. Poland, nos. 40503/17, 42902/17 and 43643/14, §§ 171-86, 23 July 2020; D.A. and Others v. Poland, no. 51246/17, §§ 58-70, 8 July 2021; and O.M. and D.S. v. Ukraine, no. 18603/12, §§ 80-98, 15 September 2022).
138.  In all cases of removal of an asylum-seeker from a Contracting State to a third intermediary country without examination of the asylum requests on the merits, regardless of whether the receiving third country is an EU member State or not or whether it is a State Party to the Convention or not, it is the duty of the removing State to examine thoroughly the question whether or not there is a real risk of the asylum-seeker being denied access, in the receiving third country, to an adequate asylum procedure, protecting him or her against refoulement (see Ilias and Ahmed, § 134, and M.K. and Others v. Poland, § 173, both cited above). This examination must precede the removal to the third country (see Ilias and Ahmed, § 137, and M.K. and Others v. Poland, § 178, both cited above). If it is established that the existing guarantees in this regard are insufficient, Article 3 implies a duty that the asylum-seekers should not be removed to the third country concerned (see Ilias and Ahmed, § 134, and M.K. and Others v. Poland, § 173, both cited above).
139.  In Ilias and Ahmed, which concerned the removal of an asylumseeker from a Contracting State to a third country which was not an EU member State, the Court further stated that in addition to the main question whether the individual would have access to an adequate asylum procedure in the receiving third country, where the alleged risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 concerned, for example, conditions of detention or living conditions for asylum-seekers in the receiving third country, that risk was also to be assessed by the expelling State (see Ilias and Ahmed, cited above, § 131).
140.  Failure to discharge the above-mentioned procedural obligation under Article 3 of the Convention to assess the risks of treatment contrary to that provision prior to removing asylum-seekers to a third intermediary country constitutes a violation of Article 3 of the Convention (see Ilias and Ahmed, cited above, §§ 163-64).
Application of these principles to the present case
141.  It is not in dispute between the parties that the applicant expressed his wish to apply for asylum in Germany when he was questioned at Passau police station (see paragraphs 13 and 17 above and compare M.K. and Others v. Poland, §§ 174-76; D.A. and Others v. Poland, §§ 60-62; and O.M. and D.S. v. Ukraine, §§ 85-91, all cited above). The German authorities did not process the applicant’s asylum request before returning him to Greece.
142.  The impugned measure and the administrative arrangement on which it was based need to be viewed in the specific context of the developments in the aftermath of the Court’s judgment in M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece (cited above) in 2011. Following that judgment, transfers to Greece under the “Dublin system” were suspended for a number of years. In late 2016 the European Commission considered that Greece had made significant progress, but that shortcomings in the Greek asylum system remained, and recommended that member States gradually resume transfers to Greece subject to certain conditions, including the exemption of vulnerable asylum applicants (see paragraph 62 above). Concurring in substance with the assessment of the European Commission, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe and UNHCR similarly considered that improvements in the Greek asylum system had been made, but that various challenges persisted (see paragraphs 66 and 69-70 above). The different stakeholders identified challenges and shortcomings in relation to, inter alia, the processing of asylum applications, the capacity and quality of reception facilities, the treatment of vulnerable individuals as well as the conditions of detention of asylum-seekers (see paragraphs 66-73 above).
143.  At the relevant time, with regard to transfers of asylum-seekers to Greece (under the Dublin III Regulation), the European Commission made the following recommendation (see paragraph 62 above):
“Before transferring an applicant to Greece, Member State authorities are invited to cooperate closely with the Greek authorities in order to ensure that the conditions indicated in point 9 [of the Recommendation of 8 December 2016] are met and in particular that the applicant will be received in a reception facility meeting the standards set out in EU law, in particular in the Reception Conditions Directive 2013/33/EU, that his or her application will be examined within the deadlines specified in the Asylum Procedures Directive 2013/32/EU, and that he or she will be treated in line with EU legislation in every other relevant respect.”
144.  It follows that, on the basis of the information available, the German authorities knew or ought to have known about the above-mentioned general shortcomings in the Greek asylum system (compare Ilias and Ahmed, cited above, § 134).
145.  In view of the foregoing particular situation, at that time there was an insufficient basis for a general presumption that the applicant would, following his removal from Germany to Greece, have access to an adequate asylum procedure in Greece, protecting him against refoulement, and that he would not risk being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 there.
146.  The Court does not overlook the fact that the applicant was removed on the basis of an administrative arrangement between Germany and Greece and that the Greek authorities were notified of his removal (see paragraphs 15 and 63 above). On the one hand, this distinguishes the present case from Ilias and Ahmed, where the applicants were not returned on the basis of an arrangement between the Hungarian and Serbian authorities, but were induced to enter Serbia illegally, which exacerbated the risks of denial of access to an asylum procedure in Serbia (see Ilias and Ahmed, cited above, §§ 161 and 163). On the other hand, the administrative arrangement on the basis of which the applicant was removed from Germany to Greece did not contain any provisions guaranteeing that asylum-seekers removed under that arrangement would, following their removal, have access to an effective asylum procedure in Greece in which the merits of their asylum claim would be assessed, including, if need be, by continuing or reopening an earlier asylum procedure where such a procedure had been terminated without assessment of the asylum claim. Nor did the arrangement contain guarantees that the asylum-seekers removed on the basis of the arrangement would not be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 in Greece on account of, for example, conditions of detention or living conditions for asylum-seekers (in respect of the acceptability of guarantees of a more general nature in removal cases, see, for example, J.A. and Others v. the Netherlands (dec.), no. 21459/14, §§ 30-31, 3 November 2015).
147.  Nor did the Government submit that the German authorities, prior to removing the applicant, had ensured that he would have access to an adequate asylum procedure in Greece and that he would not be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 there on account of conditions of detention or living conditions for asylum-seekers. Moreover, they did not submit that such risks had been assessed before the applicant’s removal to Greece. The order refusing the applicant entry to Germany on the basis of which he was ultimately returned to Greece did not contain an assessment of whether he would, following his removal, run a real risk of being denied access to an asylum procedure in Greece affording sufficient guarantees to avoid him being removed, directly or indirectly, to Syria without a proper evaluation of any risks of treatment contrary to Article 3 which he might face there; nor did it contain an assessment of whether he would face conditions of detention in Greece which might be in breach of Article 3 (see paragraphs 16 and 54 above and the case-law quoted in paragraphs 138-139 above, and compare O.M. and D.S. v. Ukraine, cited above, §§ 96-97).
148.  Moreover, as established in paragraph 124 above, the German authorities initially gave the applicant incorrect information about the country to which he was going to be removed, the legal basis for his removal and where to lodge a remedy against that decision. The order on the basis of which the applicant was ultimately removed to Greece was served on him shortly before his departure for the airport and was not given to him in Arabic. In addition, no interpreter was present, and he was not assisted by a lawyer during the short period of time which he spent on German territory.
149.  Having regard to the foregoing, the Court finds that the respondent State failed to discharge its procedural obligation under Article 3 of the Convention to satisfy itself, through respective guarantees in the administrative arrangement, or an individualised assessment, that the applicant did not run a real risk of being denied access to an adequate asylum procedure in Greece and would not be detained in conditions contrary to Article 3 there.
150.  The above-mentioned considerations are sufficient for the Court to conclude that the applicant’s removal from Germany to Greece was in violation of Article 3 of the Convention – notably the fact that at the relevant time (i) there was an insufficient basis for a general presumption that the applicant would, following his removal from Germany to Greece, have access to an adequate asylum procedure in Greece, protecting him against refoulement, and would not risk being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 there; (ii) neither the administrative arrangement on the basis of which the applicant was removed nor an individual assurance provided for any guarantees that asylum-seekers removed under that arrangement would, following their removal, have access to an effective asylum procedure in Greece in which the merits of their asylum claim would be assessed, and that asylum-seekers removed under that arrangement would not be exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 in Greece on account of, for example, conditions of detention or living conditions for asylum-seekers; (iii) the German authorities had not demonstrated that they had assessed such risks before removing the applicant to Greece; and (iv) the applicant was hastily removed without having access to a lawyer prior to his removal. While the events in Greece which occurred following the applicant’s removal do not alter this finding, the Court observes that the applicant was detained in conditions contrary to Article 3 of the Convention following his removal (see paragraphs 81-85 above; see also, mutatis mutandis, M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above, §§ 366-67). Moreover, the applicant, against whom a final removal decision was issued when he was returned to Greece from Germany (see paragraphs 6-7 and 21 above), did not manage to have the decision discontinuing the proceedings concerning his first asylum application in Greece – proceedings in which the merits of his asylum claim had not been assessed – revoked (see paragraphs 9, 22 and 24 above). The applicant later managed to lodge another asylum application in Greece, which was assessed by way of the regular asylum procedure after it had been determined that he was vulnerable, and which led to him being granted refugee status (see paragraphs 25, 31, 34-35 and 52 above). While the applicant thus eventually had access to an effective asylum procedure in Greece, which protected him against refoulement to Syria, this turn of events was neither guaranteed nor reasonably foreseeable when the German authorities removed the applicant to Greece without discharging their procedural obligation under Article 3 of the Convention.
151.  It follows that there has been a violation of the procedural limb of this provision.
Alleged violation of Article 13 in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention on account of the applicant’s lack of access to an effective domestic remedy to challenge his return to Greece
152.  The applicant alleged that in Germany he had not had access to an effective domestic remedy against his removal to Greece, as required by Article 13 of the Convention, despite having an arguable complaint under Article 3 on account of both the Greek asylum procedure exposing him to a risk of chain refoulement and the detention conditions he would face there.
Article 13 of the Convention reads as follows:
“Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in [the] Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.”
153.  The Court observes that this complaint is closely linked to the complaint lodged against Germany under Article 3 and must be likewise declared admissible.
154.  Having regard to the reasoning which has led it to conclude that the German authorities’ procedural obligation under Article 3 of the Convention was breached in the present case (see paragraphs 148 and 150 above), the Court does not consider it necessary to examine separately the same facts from the standpoint of Article 13 in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention (see O.M. and D.S. v. Ukraine, § 100, and Ilias and Ahmed, § 179, both cited above).
APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
155.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
Non-pecuniary damage
Greece
156.  In respect of non-pecuniary damage, the applicant claimed 10,000 euros (EUR) in relation to the violation of Article 3 of the Convention, and EUR 5,000 in relation to the violation of Article 5 §§ 1 and 4 of the Convention.
157.  The Greek Government considered that these amounts were excessive and unjustified.
158.  The Court awards the applicant EUR 6,500 in respect of nonpecuniary damage, plus any tax that may be chargeable. It dismisses the remainder of the applicant’s claim for just satisfaction.
Germany
159.  In respect of non-pecuniary damage, the applicant claimed EUR 20,000 in relation to the violation of Article 3 of the Convention, and EUR 5,000 in relation to the violation of Article 13 read in conjunction with Article 3 of the Convention.
160.  The German Government submitted that the applicant was not entitled to just satisfaction. In any event, the amounts claimed were excessive.
161.  The Court considers that the applicant must have suffered non‑pecuniary damage as a result of the procedural violation of Article 3 of the Convention found in the present case. Having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case, it awards EUR 8,000 to the applicant in respect of non-pecuniary damage, plus any tax that may be chargeable (see, mutatis mutandis, Ilias and Ahmed, cited above, § 255).
Costs and expenses
162.  The applicant did not present a claim for costs and expenses. Hence, the Court is not called upon to make an award under this head.
