INTRODUCTION
1.  The application concerns the domestic courts’ decision to award the applicant compensation for the excessive length of proceedings but to refuse to award her the costs of her legal representation, which exceeded the amount of that compensation. The applicant complained of a violation of her rights under Article 6 § 1 and Article 13 of the Convention as well as Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 thereto.
THE FACTS
2.  The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Zagreb. She was represented by Ms B. Ivanišević, a lawyer practising in Zagreb.
3.  The Government were represented by their Agent, Ms Š. Stažnik.
4.  The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.
5.  By a judgment of 27 June 2013, the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court (Općinski građanski sud u Zagrebu), inter alia, (i) granted the applicant and her husband D.M. a divorce; (ii) decided that their son L.M., born in 2005, would live with the applicant; and (iii) granted D.M. access (contact) rights.
6.  On 14 March 2020, after exercising his contact rights over a weekend, D.M. retained their son (then aged fourteen and a half) at his home and refused to return him to the applicant.
Enforcement proceedings and related civil proceedings
Enforcement proceedings
7.  On 24 June 2020 the applicant applied to the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court for enforcement of the above-mentioned judgment (see paragraph 5 above) by having the child returned to her.
8.  On 19 October 2020 the Municipal Civil Court asked the relevant social welfare centre to appoint a special guardian for L.M. and submit a report on the expediency of the enforcement proceedings and how it could affect the child. The relevant social welfare centre did so on 3 and 5 November 2020 respectively.
9.  On 19 November 2020 the court invited the special guardian to reply to the application for enforcement and inform it of the child’s views. On 27 January 2021 the special guardian did so and informed the court that L.M. objected to being returned to the applicant but wished to have regular contact with her.
10.  On 28 May 2021 the court issued a writ of execution (rješenje o ovrsi) ordering the handover of L.M. to the applicant. It then transferred the case to the Novi Zagreb Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Novom Zagrebu) for the writ to be executed because the child was living with his father at an address in its jurisdiction.
11.  On 2 July 2021 the applicant’s advocate informed that court that L.M. was at that time staying with his paternal grandmother in Zadar. On 6 July 2021 the advocate also informed the court of the two addresses at which L.M. was staying while in Zagreb.
12.  An attempt to execute the writ at those two addresses on 14 July 2021 failed because the applicant’s son could not be found. On 16 July 2021 the Novi Zagreb Municipal Civil Court transferred the case to the Zadar Municipal Court (Općinski sud u Zadru).
13.  On 31 August 2021 the applicant requested a change in the method of enforcement to a threat of imprisonment against D.M. if he failed to comply with the writ of execution and hand L.M. over to her.
14.  By a decision of 23 September 2022, which was upheld on 21 December 2022 by the Split County Court (Županijski sud u Splitu), the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court, dismissed that request holding that in the concurrent civil proceedings an interim measure temporarily changing L.M.’s residential parent had been issued (see paragraph 19 below).
15.  On 5 November 2021 the relevant social welfare centre informed the court that it had interviewed L.M., who had stated that “the whole situation could be resolved if the mother respected his wishes and did not force him to live with her”.
16.  On 29 November 2021 the Zadar Municipal Court suspended the enforcement after the police established that the applicant’s son was not staying with his grandmother in Zadar (see paragraph 11 above). The case was returned to the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court.
17.  On 14 August 2023 L.M. turned eighteen and became an adult. Accordingly, the enforcement proceedings became devoid of purpose.
Civil proceedings
18.  Meanwhile, on 22 July 2020 D.M. brought a civil action in the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court against the applicant, seeking to amend the judgment of 27 June 2013 (see paragraph 5 above) regarding the resident parent so that L.M. would live with him. He also sought an interim measure to that effect. He argued that the circumstances had changed, inter alia, because on 10 September 2019 L.M. and the applicant had had a verbal and physical altercation as a result of which they had both been convicted of a minor offence of domestic violence, whereupon L.M. no longer wished to live with her.
19.  By a decision of 14 July 2022, the Municipal Court granted the interim measure sought by D.M. and decided that L.M. would temporarily live with him. The interim measure immediately became final because the parties waived their right to appeal.
20.  By a judgment of 18 April 2023, the Municipal Court amended its judgment of 27 June 2013 (see paragraph 5 above). It decided that L.M. would live with D.M. and granted the applicant access (contact) rights. She appealed.
21.  On 12 September 2023 the Pula County Court (Županijski sud u Puli) dismissed the applicant’s appeal and upheld the Municipal Court’s judgment.
Proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time
Purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act
22.  Meanwhile, on 16 December 2020 the applicant, represented by an advocate, lodged a request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time – a purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 40-41 below) – and asked the President of the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court to expedite the above-mentioned enforcement proceedings (see paragraphs 7-9 above). She also sought reimbursement of her advocate’s costs for drafting that request, which amounted to 1,250 Croatian kunas (HRK), equivalent to 165.90 euros (EUR).
23.  By a decision of 29 December 2020, the court’s President dismissed the applicant’s request, finding that the enforcement proceedings complained of had not exceeded a reasonable time. The President also dismissed her claim for costs, finding that they had been unnecessarily incurred and that there was no legal basis for awarding them, having regard to the relevant provision of the Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act (see paragraph 45 below).
24.  On 19 January 2021 the applicant appealed against that decision and sought reimbursement of her advocate’s costs for drafting that appeal, which amounted to HRK 1,250 (EUR 165.90). She explained that as a layperson she could not have drafted the initial request or the appeal without the assistance of an advocate, and that the costs of those pleadings had therefore been necessarily incurred.
25.  By a decision of 1 February 2021, the Zagreb County Court (Županijski sud u Zagrebu) dismissed the applicant’s appeal. As regards the costs, the court held that the applicant was not entitled to have them reimbursed because both her initial request and her appeal had been unsuccessful.
First constitutional complaint
26.  On 26 March 2021 the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 35 below), complaining of the excessive length of the above-mentioned enforcement proceedings. She sought reimbursement of the costs of her legal representation incurred to date in pursuing the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 22 and 24 above) and the costs incurred in drafting the constitutional complaint, which amounted to HRK 6,125 (EUR 812.93).
27.  By a decision of 2 June 2021, the Constitutional Court (Ustavni sud Republike Hrvatske) (i) found a violation of the applicant’s right to a hearing within a reasonable time and of her right to respect for family life, both guaranteed by the Croatian Constitution; (ii) awarded her HRK 5,000 (EUR 663.61) in compensation; and (iii) ordered the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court to complete the enforcement within thirty days from the publication of its decision in the Official Gazette. However, it dismissed her claim for costs, referring to section 23 of the Constitutional Court Act, which provides that, unless the court decides otherwise, each participant in proceedings before it has to bear its own costs (see paragraph 36 below). The Constitutional Court’s decision was published in the Official Gazette on 7 July 2021.
Complementary remedy under the 2013 Courts Act
28.  On 15 October 2021 the applicant lodged a request with the Zagreb County Court for payment of appropriate compensation – a complementary (combined compensatory and acceleratory) remedy under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 40 and 42 below). She complained that the Municipal Court had not complied with the time-limit set in the Constitutional Court’s decision of 2 June 2021 (see paragraph 27 above) and asked the County Court to expedite the enforcement proceedings and award her appropriate compensation. On 18 October 2021 she also sought reimbursement of her advocate’s costs for drafting that request, which amounted to HRK 1,250 (EUR 165.90), as well as the costs incurred in pursuing the other length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 22-25 above).
29.  The State participated in those proceedings as the counterparty, represented by the State Attorney’s Office, which argued that the applicant’s request be refused.
30.  By a decision of 13 April 2022, the County Court found the applicant’s request well-founded, ordered the Zagreb Municipal Civil Court to complete the enforcement within thirty days and awarded her HRK 2,500 (EUR 331.81) in compensation. It however dismissed her claim for costs, finding that, under the Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act, the costs were borne by the party in whose interest the proceedings were conducted (see paragraph 45 below).
31.  The applicant lodged an appeal with the Supreme Court (Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske) against that decision, claiming that the amount of compensation was too low. She also complained about the decision on costs.
32.  By a decision of 1 March 2023, the Supreme Court dismissed the applicant’s appeal, holding that the compensation awarded was sufficient and that the decision on costs was in line with section 20 of the Judicial NonContentious Procedure Act (see paragraph 45 below).
Second constitutional complaint
33.  Meanwhile, on 24 September 2021 the applicant lodged a second constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act, again complaining of the excessive length of the above-mentioned enforcement proceedings. She also complained of the breach of her right of access to a court and the right to the peaceful enjoyment of her possessions in that she had been forced to bear the costs of her earlier constitutional complaint, which had imposed an excessive financial burden on her. The applicant this time did not ask the Constitutional Court to award her the costs incurred in pursuing the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 22-25 above), but sought the costs incurred in drafting the second constitutional complaint, which amounted to HRK 6,125 (EUR 812.93).
34.  On 10 January 2022 the applicant herself submitted a supplement to her constitutional complaint, in which she set out the chronology of the enforcement proceedings in question and of the proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time, and enclosed the relevant documents.
35.  By a decision of 20 December 2022, the Constitutional Court found a violation of the applicant’s constitutional right to respect for family life and awarded her HRK 5,000 (EUR 663.61) in compensation. However, referring to section 23 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 36 below), it dismissed her claim for costs, holding that the case was not complex because she had complained about the length of the proceedings, in respect of which that court had already found a violation in its earlier decision.
RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK
domestic law
The Constitutional Court Act
Relevant provisions
36.  The relevant provisions of the Constitutional Act on the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia (Ustavni zakon o Ustavnom sudu Republike Hrvatske, Official Gazette no. 99/99 with subsequent amendments – “the Constitutional Court Act”) governing the costs of proceedings read as follows:
Section 23
“Each participant in Constitutional Court proceedings shall bear its own costs, unless the Constitutional Court decides otherwise.”
Section 80
“The Constitutional Court may order a complainant who has been unsuccessful in his or her constitutional complaint to pay the costs of the proceedings before the Constitutional Court if he or she has caused them to be incurred through his or her own fault.”
37.  The other relevant provisions of the Constitutional Court Act read as follows:
Section 62
“(1)  Anyone may lodge a constitutional complaint with the Constitutional Court if he or she considers that a decision of a State authority, local or regional government, or a legal person invested with public authority, on his or her rights or obligations or as regards suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence, has violated his or her human rights or fundamental freedoms ... guaranteed by the Constitution (‘constitutional right[s]’) ...”
Section 63
“(1)  The Constitutional Court shall examine a constitutional complaint even before all legal remedies have been exhausted if the relevant court has failed to decide within a reasonable time on the rights or obligations of a party [to the proceedings] or as regards suspicion or accusation of a criminal offence ...
(2)  If it finds the constitutional complaint regarding failure to decide within a reasonable time referred to in paragraph 1 of this section well-founded, the Constitutional Court shall set a time-limit within which the relevant court must decide the case on the merits ...
(3)  In the decision referred to in paragraph 2 of this section, the Constitutional Court shall award appropriate compensation to the complainant for the violation of his or her constitutional right ... to a hearing within a reasonable time. The compensation shall be paid from the State budget within three months of the date on which a request for payment is lodged.”
Relevant practice
38.  According to the Constitutional Court’s practice at the relevant time, persons complaining of the excessive length of ongoing judicial proceedings could lodge a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act only if they had first availed themselves of other lengthofproceedings remedies, notably those under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 40-42 below). It consistently declared such constitutional complaints inadmissible if the complainants had not made use of such remedies.
Relevant documents
39.  The Constitutional Court’s website contains a document entitled “Instructions for filling in a constitutional complaint form” (Upute za ispunjavanje obrasca ustavne tužbe). At the material time, the relevant part, regarding complainants’ representatives, read as follows:
“The representative does not have to be an advocate, but due to the special nature of the constitutional court procedure, it is always better to hire a professional.”
Legislation concerning length-of-proceedings remedies
40.  Sections 64 to 69 of the 2013 Courts Act (Zakon o sudovima, Official Gazette no. 28/13), which were in force between 14 March 2013 and 7 April 2024, provided for two length-of-proceedings remedies: (i) a purely acceleratory remedy as the primary remedy, and (ii) a combined compensatory and acceleratory remedy as a complementary remedy, which was made available only in limited circumstances. The text of those provisions is reproduced in Novak v. Croatia ((dec.), no. 7877/14, § 23, 7 July 2016.
41.  In particular, under sections 65 to 67 a party to pending judicial proceedings who considered that they had been unduly protracted had the right to seek a purely acceleratory remedy, namely to lodge a “request for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time” and to ask the president of the court before which the proceedings were pending to expedite them by setting a time-limit of a maximum of six months within which the judge hearing the case had to give a decision.
42.  Sections 68 and 69 provided that a complementary remedy (combining compensatory and acceleratory elements), namely a “request for payment of appropriate compensation”, was available only in cases where the judge hearing the case had not complied with the time-limit for deciding the case specified by the court’s president when granting the request for the purely acceleratory remedy.
43.  Section 64(2) provided that in proceedings concerning those remedies the rules of non-contentious procedure applied mutatis mutandis.
44.  Other relevant domestic law and practice concerning length‑of‑proceedings remedies in Croatia is set out in Mirjana Marić v. Croatia (no. 9849/15, §§ 29-41, 30 July 2020).
Other relevant legislation and practice
Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act
45.  Section 20(1) of the 1934 Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act (Zakon o sudskom vanparničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia no. 175/34), which was applicable in Croatia from 4 February 1935 until 9 July 2023, provided that in non-contentious proceedings the costs were borne by the party in whose interests the proceedings were conducted, unless otherwise provided. Section 21 provided that in non-contentious proceedings the provisions of the Civil Procedure Act applied mutatis mutandis, unless otherwise provided by the Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act.
Civil Procedure Act
46.  The relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Act (Zakon o parničnom postupku, Official Gazette of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia no. 4/77 with subsequent amendments, and Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia no. 53/91 with subsequent amendments, as in force at the material time, read as follows:
COSTS OF PROCEEDINGS
Section 151(1) and (2)
“(1)  The costs of proceedings include disbursements made during or in relation to the proceedings.
(2)  The costs of proceedings also include a fee for the services of an advocate and other persons entitled by law to receive a fee.”
Section 154(1)
“(1)  A party who loses a case completely shall reimburse the costs of the opposing party ...”
Section 155
“(1)  In deciding which costs shall be reimbursed to a party, the court shall take into account only those costs which were necessary for the conduct of the proceedings. When deciding which costs were necessary and their level, the court shall carefully consider all the circumstances ...
(2)  If there is a prescribed scale of advocates’ fees or other costs, these costs shall be awarded in accordance with that scale.”
The Scale of Advocates’ Fees
47.  The Scale of Advocates’ Fees (Tarifa o nagradama i naknadi troškova za rad odvjetnika, Official Gazette no. 142/12 with further amendments), which entered into force on 19 December 2012, as in force at the material time, provided that the costs of legal representation consisted of the services rendered by advocates, increased by VAT (at the time 25%) and the necessary expenses, which clients were obliged to pay. It also provided that:
(i)  submissions instituting non-contentious proceedings were worth 50 points (section 16(1)) in cases where the value of the claim was indeterminable, and appeals in such proceedings were worth 25% more (section 18(1));
(ii)  submissions instituting proceedings before the Constitutional Court and other reasoned submissions containing factual and legal arguments were worth 500 points (section 27(1)); and
(iii)  the value of one point was HRK 10 (section 50).
COUNCIL OF EUROPE INSTRUMENTS
48.  The relevant part of Recommendation No. R (81) 7 on Measures Facilitating Access to Justice, adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 14 May 1981 at its 68th session, reads as follows:
“Considering that the rights of access to justice and to a fair hearing as guaranteed under Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights, is an essential feature of any democratic society;
Considering that court procedure is often so complex, time-consuming and costly that private individuals, especially those in an economically or socially weak position, encounter serious difficulties in the exercise of their rights in member states;
Bearing in mind that an effective system of legal aid and legal advice, as provided for under Resolution (78) 8 of the Committee of Ministers, may greatly contribute to the elimination of such obstacles;
...
Recommends the governments of member states to take or reinforce, as the case may be, all measures which they consider necessary with a view to the progressive implementation of the principles set out in the appendix to this recommendation.
Appendix to Recommendation No. R (81) 7

Principles
...
B.  Simplification
...
4.  No litigant should be prevented from being assisted by a lawyer ... Where, having regard to the nature of the matter involved, it would be desirable, in order to facilitate access to justice, for an individual to put his own case before the courts, then representation by a lawyer should not be compulsory.
...
D.  Cost of justice
13.  Particular attention should be given to the question of lawyers’ and experts’ fees in so far as they constitute an obstacle to access to justice. Some form of control of the amount of these fees should be ensured.
14.  Except in special circumstances a winning party should in principle obtain from the losing party recovery of his costs including lawyers’ fees, reasonably incurred in the proceedings.”
