THE LAW
ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 6 § 1 OF THE CONVENTION
49.  The applicant complained that the Constitutional Court’s refusal to award her the costs of her legal representation before that court and the inability to recoup the costs of legal representation which she had incurred in pursuing the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act, had had a deterrent effect on the exercise of her right of access to a court. She relied on Article 6 § 1 of the Convention, the relevant part of which reads as follows:
“In the determination of his civil rights and obligations ... everyone is entitled to a fair ... hearing within a reasonable time by [a] ... tribunal ...”
Scope of this complaint
50.  It is to be noted that before the Court the applicant did not complain about the excessive length of the enforcement proceedings of which she had complained before the domestic courts. The Court therefore cannot examine any issue related to the length of those proceedings (see Radomilja and Others v. Croatia [GC], nos. 37685/10 and 22768/12, §§ 109, 123 and 126, 20 March 2018).
51.  The Court further notes that in her application to the Court, the applicant did not mention that she had lodged her second constitutional complaint (see paragraph 33 above). What is more, once the Government had brought that fact to the Court’s attention, the applicant expressly stated in her observations of 16 October 2023 that she had decided not to submit an application to the Court concerning the second decision of the Constitutional Court (see paragraph 33 above).
52.  The applicant did mention in her application that she had used the complementary (combined compensatory and acceleratory) remedy under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraph 28 above). However, once the Zagreb County Court had decided on that remedy on 13 April 2022 (see paragraph 30 above), the applicant did not complain in her observations about that court’s refusal to award her the costs of that remedy.
53.  That being so, and given that it can base its decision only on the facts complained of (see, Fu Quan, s.r.o. v. the Czech Republic [GC], no. 24827/14, § 145, 1 June 2023; Grosam v. the Czech Republic [GC], no. 19750/13, § 90, 1 June 2023; and Radomilja and Others, cited above, §§ 120-121 and 124), the Court finds that the applicant’s complaint (see paragraph 49 above) concerns only the Constitutional Court’s refusal to award her the costs of her first constitutional complaint (see paragraph 26 above) and the inability to recoup the costs of legal representation which she had incurred in pursuing the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 22-25 above).
Admissibility
Submissions by the parties
The Government
54.  In their observations of 31 August 2023 on admissibility and the merits, the Government argued that Article 6 was not applicable to the proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time (see paragraphs 14-32 above). They admitted that the right to a hearing within a reasonable time was a “civil” right within the meaning of that Article but argued that the proceedings in question had not involved a “dispute” over that right.
55.  In the same observations, the Government further argued that in her constitutional complaints (see paragraphs 26 and 33 above) the applicant had not complained of a breach of her right of access to a court on account of the ordinary courts’ refusal to award her the costs incurred in pursuing the lengthof-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraphs 22-25 above).
56.  In their comments of 14 November 2023 on the applicant’s claims for just satisfaction and additional observations, the Government argued that the applicant had not asked the Constitutional Court to quash the decisions of the ordinary courts refusing to award her those costs.
The applicant
57.  The applicant emphasised that in her first constitutional complaint she had sought reimbursement of the costs she had incurred to date in pursuing the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act (see paragraph 26 above). Admittedly, she had not specifically complained in that constitutional complaint that her right of access to court had been breached by the ordinary courts’ refusal to award her those costs, but that had been because she had believed that if the Constitutional Court had found her constitutional complaint well-founded, it would have awarded her not only the costs of that complaint, but also the costs incurred in pursuing the lengthof-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act beforehand.
The Court’s assessment
Applicability
58.  The Court has found in a number of cases that Article 6 § 1 of the Convention is applicable to proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time which have features similar to those in the present case (see Vaney v. France, no. 53946/00, § 53, 30 November 2004; Simaldone v. Italy, no. 22644/03, §§ 48-56, 31 March 2009; Veriter v. France, no. 31508/07, §§ 81-87, 14 October 2010; Belperio and Ciarmoli v. Italy, no. 7932/04, §§ 39-48, 21 December 2010; Gagliano Giorgi v. Italy, no. 23563/07, §§ 67-76, ECHR 2012 (extracts)). It sees no reason to hold otherwise in the present case. The Government’s objection as to the inapplicability of Article 6 (see paragraph 54 above) must therefore be dismissed.
Exhaustion of domestic remedies
59.  The Court first reiterates that applicants are only required to exhaust domestic remedies which are available in theory and in practice at the relevant time and which are accessible, capable of providing redress in respect of their complaints and offer reasonable prospects of success (see, for example, Sejdovic v. Italy [GC], no. 56581/00, § 46, ECHR 2006‑II, and Glavinić and Marković v. Croatia, nos. 11388/15 and 25605/15, § 61, 30 July 2020).
60.  It notes that, under the Constitutional Court Act, that court can only award costs incurred in the proceedings before it (see paragraph 36 above). Furthermore, while it may quash a decision on costs which it finds to be in breach of rights guaranteed by the Constitution or the Convention and remit the case for fresh consideration, it may do so only following an ordinary constitutional complaint lodged under section 62 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 37 above).
61.  However, in the present case the applicant lodged a constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraph 37 above), which may not be lodged against decisions but only in situations where the relevant court has failed to decide within a reasonable time.
62.  It follows that the constitutional complaint under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act, which the applicant used to complain of the excessive length of the enforcement proceedings, was not effective for her access-to-court grievances in so far as they concerned the costs of the remedies under the 2013 Courts Act, as that type of constitutional complaint was not capable of providing redress in respect of those grievances (see paragraph 59 above). Consequently, contrary to the Government’s suggestion (see paragraph 55 above), in order to exhaust domestic remedies the applicant was not required to complain of a breach of her right of access to a court in her constitutional complaint.
63.  As regards the Government’s argument that the applicant had not asked the Constitutional Court to quash the decisions of the ordinary courts refusing to award her those costs (see paragraph 56 above), the Court notes that this would have actually required her to combine the constitutional complaint about the excessive length of proceedings she lodged under section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act with a different remedy, namely an ordinary constitutional complaint under section 62 of that Act in which she would have complained that those decisions were in breach of her right of access to a court.
64.  The Court further notes in this connection that this argument was advanced for the first time in the Government’s additional observations of 14 November 2023, and that they are therefore estopped from raising it. In that regard, the Court reiterates that, under Rule 55 of the Rules of Court, any plea of inadmissibility, including the reasons given for the plea, must be raised by the respondent Contracting Party, in so far as the nature of the objection and the circumstances so allow, in its written or oral observations on the admissibility of the application (see Khlaifia and Others v. Italy [GC], no. 16483/12, § 52, 15 December 2016, and Mooren v. Germany [GC], no. 11364/03, § 58, 9 July 2009). It does not therefore suffice for the Government to have pleaded non-exhaustion on different grounds in their initial observations of 31 August 2023 (see paragraph 55 above, and Mooren, cited above). The Government did not provide any explanation for that delay and the Court finds no exceptional circumstance capable of exempting them from their obligation to raise their non-exhaustion objection with reference to that argument in their initial observations (ibid.).
65.  Accordingly, the Government’s objection as to the non-exhaustion of domestic remedies (see paragraphs 55-56 above) must also be dismissed.
Conclusion
66.  The Court further notes that this complaint is neither manifestly ill-founded nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention. It must therefore be declared admissible.
Merits
Submissions by the parties
The applicant
67.  The applicant submitted that she had been forced to hire an advocate because, as a layperson, she could not have drafted the request for the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act or the constitutional complaint herself. Drafting such request or a constitutional complaint was not simple: there was no standard form and they had to be reasoned, linking the facts of the case with the relevant provisions, for which professional legal expertise was needed. The Government’s arguments to the contrary (see paragraph 74 below) were unreasonable and undermined the role of advocates.
68.  In reply to the Government’s argument that she had overstated some of the costs incurred (see paragraph 76 below), the applicant pointed out that the relevant domestic courts could have awarded her a reduced amount if they had considered them too high, instead of refusing to award her any. Her monthly salary was HRK 7,497.90 (EUR 995.13) and having to bear those costs had therefore imposed a significant and disproportionate burden on her.
The Government
69.  The Government submitted that the Court’s case-law that an ex post facto refusal to reimburse successful applicants’ own costs in disputes against the State arising from decisions of its organs in the exercise of public authority could constitute a restriction of their access to a court (see Dragan Kovačević v. Croatia, no. 49281/15, § 71, 12 May 2022, and the cases cited therein) was not applicable in the present case. That was because the proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time had not arisen from a decision of State organs, but had been instituted on the applicant’s initiative and in her favour.
70.  Moreover, there was nothing to suggest that the Constitutional Court’s refusal to award the applicant the costs of her legal representation before it or her inability to recoup such costs incurred in pursuing the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act had deterred or discouraged her from using that remedy or a constitutional complaint and thereby exercising her right of access to a court: she had used both types of remedies provided for by that Act and had twice availed herself of a constitutional complaint (see paragraphs 23, 26, 28 and 33 above).
71.  For those reasons, the Government submitted that there had been no restriction of the applicant’s right of access to a court. If the Court were to find otherwise, the Government submitted that the restriction had pursued a legitimate aim and had been proportionate.
72.  Relying on the Court’s findings in Dragan Kovačević (cited above, §§ 75-78), the Government argued that the rules on costs contained in the Constitutional Court Act and the Judicial Non-Contentious Procedure Act (see paragraphs 36 and 45 above) pursued a legitimate aim. Proceedings before the Constitutional Court, like those following the use of the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act, were formally one-party proceedings. Therefore, those intending to initiate such proceedings did not run the risk, normally present in civil proceedings, that, if unsuccessful, they would have to bear not only their own costs but also those of the opposing party. The absence of such a risk, together with the absence of an obligation to pay court fees in either type of proceedings could therefore result in the relevant courts becoming overburdened with a large number of unmeritorious constitutional complaints or purely acceleratory remedies, which could jeopardise the proper functioning of those courts.
73.  The restriction of the applicant’s right of access to a court had been proportionate because (i) representation by an advocate had been neither necessary nor justified, (ii) it had been foreseeable for the applicant that she would not be able to recoup the costs of her legal representation, (iii) the costs she had allegedly incurred had not been higher than the compensation received, and (iv) having to bear those costs had not imposed a disproportionate financial burden on her.
74.  Representation by an advocate had not been necessary because proceedings for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time instituted under the 2013 Courts Act or section 63 of the Constitutional Court Act were rather simple as all relevant facts were established by the relevant courts of their own motion. Such proceedings therefore did not require the assistance of an advocate. Moreover, the applicant was a highly educated person who had even submitted a supplement to her second constitutional complaint herself, setting out all the relevant facts and enclosing the relevant evidence (see paragraph 34 above). Her representation by an advocate had therefore not been justified either.
75.  The foreseeability of the restrictions had been evident from the relevant provisions of the Constitutional Court Act and Judicial NonContentious Procedure Act (see paragraphs 36 and 45 above) and from the resulting longstanding practice of the domestic courts.
76.  The applicant had overstated and therefore miscalculated the costs incurred in pursuing the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act, which was why the total costs of that remedy and the constitutional complaint had not exceeded the compensation the domestic courts had awarded her for the breaches of her right to a hearing within a reasonable time and of her right to respect for family life.
77.  Lastly, the Government pointed out that the applicant was not a particularly vulnerable person and that her monthly income (see paragraph 68 above) had been above average and exceeded the costs of a constitutional complaint. Therefore, bearing the costs of her legal representation had not imposed a disproportionate financial burden on her.
78.  In light of the foregoing, the Government argued that there had been no violation of Article 6 of the Convention in the present case.
The Court’s assessment
79.  The relevant principles emerging from the Court’s case-law concerning the right of access to a court and, in particular, access to superior courts, are summarised in Zubac v. Croatia ([GC], no. 40160/12, §§ 76-86, 5 April 2018). Specifically, a restriction of the right of access to a court will not be compatible with Article 6 § 1 if it does not pursue a legitimate aim and if there is not a reasonable relationship of proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be achieved (ibid., § 78).
80.  Imposition of a considerable financial burden after the conclusion of proceedings, whether in the form of court fees or the costs of legal representation, may constitute a restriction of the right of access to a court guaranteed by Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (see Dragan Kovačević, cited above, § 70; Stankov v. Bulgaria, no. 68490/01, §§ 52 and 54, 12 July 2007; and Klauz v. Croatia, no. 28963/10, §§ 77 and 82, 18 July 2013; see also the recommendation cited in paragraph 48 above suggesting that lawyers’ fees may constitute an obstacle to access to justice).
81.  As regards the costs of length-of-proceedings remedies the Court has held in Cocchiarella v. Italy ([GC], no. 64886/01, ECHR 2006V):
“92.  ... the Court finds it reasonable that in this type of proceedings where the State, on account of the poor organisation of its judicial system, forces litigants – to some extent – to have recourse to a compensatory remedy, the rules regarding legal costs may be different and thus avoid placing an excessive burden on litigants where their action is justified. It might appear paradoxical that, by imposing various taxes – payable prior to the lodging of an application or after the decision – the State takes away with one hand what it has awarded with the other to repair a breach of the Convention. Nor should the costs be excessive and constitute an unreasonable restriction on the right to lodge such an application and thus an infringement of the right of access to a tribunal ...”
82.  In a number of cases under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention in which the applicants had won their cases domestically, the Court found a breach of their right of access to a court either because they had not been reimbursed the costs of their legal representation at all (see Dragan Kovačević, cited above, §§ 67-85; Zustović v. Croatia, no. 27903/15, §§ 98-111, 22 April 2021; and Černius and Rinkevičius v. Lithuania, nos. 73579/17 and 14620/18, §§ 65-74, 18 February 2020; see also in this connection the recommendation cited in paragraph 48 above suggesting that, except in special circumstances, a winning party should in principle obtain from the losing party recovery of his costs including lawyers’ fees, reasonably incurred in the proceedings) or because they had had to pay to their opponents costs which had exceeded the amount of compensation they had been awarded (see Klauz, cited above, §§ 76-97, and Čolić v. Croatia, no. 49083/18, §§ 39-60, 18 November 2021).
83.  It is true that the first group of above-mentioned cases concerned disputes against the State arising from decisions of its organs in the exercise of public authority. However, contrary to the Government’s argument (see paragraph 69 above), that case-law is not rendered inapplicable by the mere fact that, in the present case, the relevant proceedings did not arise from a decision of public authorities but from their inaction, namely the domestic courts’ failure to enforce a judgment in the applicant’s favour. That is because the risk of any mistake made by a public authority must be borne by the State itself and errors must not be remedied at the expense of the individuals concerned (see Zustović, cited above, § 100, and the cases cited therein), it being understood that the poor organisation of its judicial system constitutes such an error or mistake (see paragraph 79 above).
84.  In the second group of above-mentioned cases (see paragraph 82 above), in which the costs exceeded the amount of compensation awarded, the Court held that that situation had led to an absurd outcome, making the litigation pointless and rendering the applicant’s right to a court merely theoretical and illusory, and that particularly weighty reasons were required to justify such an outcome (see Čolić, cited above, §§ 46, 50-52 and 59-60).
85.  The situation in the present case is similar because, even leaving aside the costs of pursuing the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act, the costs of the applicant’s constitutional complaint alone exceeded the compensation she was awarded for the breaches of her right to a hearing within a reasonable time and her right to respect for family life. In particular, she was awarded a total of HRK 5,000 (EUR 663.61) in compensation for those breaches (see paragraph 27 above) whereas, in accordance with the Scale of Advocates’ Fees, the costs of drafting a constitutional complaint plus VAT at the time amounted to HRK 6,125 (EUR 812.93, see paragraphs 26 and 47 above).
86.  In such situations, it is not necessary to examine whether bearing the costs of her legal representation imposed a disproportionate financial burden on the applicant, having regard to her income (see the Government’s argument in paragraph 77 above). That is because, as stated above (see paragraph 84 above), if there are no particularly weighty reasons to justify it, such a situation in itself makes the restriction of access to a court disproportionate as it renders the litigation pointless and the applicant’s right to a court merely theoretical and illusory (see Čolić, cited above, §§ 46, 5051 and 59-60).
87.  Such a situation in the present case therefore required the Constitutional Court to provide (a more substantial statement of) reasons for its decision on costs rather than merely use the same wording as in section 23 of the Constitutional Court Act (see paragraphs 27 and 36 above, and compare Dragan Kovačević, cited above, § 83).
88.  Likewise, the Government failed to put forward any sufficiently convincing reasons to justify that situation.
89.  In particular, the Court is not convinced by their argument that the costs of the applicant’s legal representation were not necessary or justified (see paragraph 74 above). That argument focuses on the relative simplicity of the relevant proceedings for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time but fails to take into account that the role of an advocate is not limited to the actual drafting of a constitutional complaint or a request under the 2013 Courts Act and also includes legal advice as regards the availability of those remedies and the formal (procedural) requirements for their use.
90.  As regards the costs of the constitutional complaint, the Court reiterates its findings in Bibić v. Croatia ((dec.), no. 1620/10, § 31, 28 January 2014) and Dragan Kovačević (cited above, § 35) that legal representation before the Constitutional Court cannot be considered unwarranted, given that that court decides on complex questions concerning the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, and that for persons without legal background and experience, such matters may be difficult to grasp (see also the Constitutional Court’s own instruction at the relevant time, cited in paragraph 39 above, recommending prospective complainants to hire an advocate).
91.  As regards the costs of the length-of-proceedings remedies under the 2013 Courts Act, the Court finds that they cannot be considered unnecessary either. In particular, it would have been very difficult for the applicant as a layperson to grasp, without the professional legal advice of an advocate, the legal intricacies involved in the use of those remedies, such as, for example, the need to use them before lodging a constitutional complaint (see paragraph 38 above).
92.  The Court also finds force in the applicant’s argument that, instead of refusing to award her any costs, the relevant domestic courts could have awarded her a reduced amount (see paragraph 68 above).
93.  Therefore, while the Court agrees that, for the reasons stated by the Government (see paragraphs 74-75 above), the restriction of the applicant’s access to a court pursued a legitimate aim and was foreseeable, it was not proportionate to that aim.
94.  There has accordingly been a violation of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention.
OTHER ALLEGED VIOLATIONS OF THE CONVENTION
95.  The applicant raised the same complaint as that examined above (see paragraphs 49-94) under Article 13 of the Convention and Article 1 of Protocol No. 1 thereto.
96.  Having regard to the facts of the case, the submissions of the parties and its findings above, the Court considers that it has dealt with the main legal question raised by the case and that there is no need to examine the same complaint under those Articles (see Centre for Legal Resources on behalf of Valentin Câmpeanu v. Romania [GC], no. 47848/08, § 156, ECHR 2014).
APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION
97.  Article 41 of the Convention provides:
“If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the injured party.”
Damage
98.  The applicant claimed 2,032 euros (EUR) in respect of pecuniary damage, which corresponded to the total costs incurred in the proceedings following the use of remedies for protection of the right to a hearing within a reasonable time (see paragraphs 22-35 above). She also claimed EUR 10,000 in respect of non-pecuniary damage.
99.  The Government contested these claims.
100.  The Court has found that the domestic courts’ refusal to award the applicant the costs incurred in using the purely acceleratory remedy under the 2013 Courts Act and her first constitutional complaint was in breach of Article 6 § 1 of the Convention (see paragraphs 50-53 and 79-94 above). There is thus a sufficient causal link between her claim in respect of pecuniary damage and the violation found. The Court therefore awards the applicant EUR 1,016 under that head, plus any tax that may be chargeable to her.
101.  The Court also finds that the applicant must have sustained non‑pecuniary damage. Ruling on an equitable basis, it awards her EUR 3,000 under that head, plus any tax that may be chargeable.
Costs and expenses
102.  The applicant also claimed EUR 865 for the costs and expenses incurred before the Court.
103.  The Government contested that claim.
104.  According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that these were actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to quantum (see, among many other authorities, L.B. v. Hungary [GC], no. 36345/16, § 149, 9 March 2023). In the present case, regard being had to the documents in its possession and the above criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award the full amount claimed in respect of costs and expenses, namely EUR 865, plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applicant.
