CONCURRING OPINION OF JUDGE KOSKELO
I have voted in favour of the finding of a violation of Article 6 in this case, but not without certain misgivings. While the complaint and the arguments raised by both parties were concerned solely with the costs incurred by the applicant on account of the proceedings brought by her, I am troubled by the fact that this incidental issue of costs has overshadowed another problem relating to the underlying circumstances of the case.
At the origin of the case was a situation in which the applicant, the mother of a teenage boy at the time, found herself in conflict with her son, who no longer wanted to live with her and moved out to live with his father. The applicant reacted by instituting proceedings to have the authorities enforce the judicial decision delivered several years earlier, which had ordered that the child – who was considerably younger at that time – was to live with his mother. Having obtained an enforcement order, what ensued was a series of efforts to implement the hand-over of the teenager to his mother against his will. In the end, those efforts were unsuccessful, prompting the applicant to bring further proceedings over the length of the enforcement process.
One cannot but wonder whether this type of litigation was a judicious and justified method for attempting to resolve a delicate family situation involving a child who had already reached an age at which his will and wishes should no longer have been disregarded. Under such circumstances, pursuing the enforcement of a judicial decision delivered several years earlier does not appear to sit well with the aim of safeguarding the child’s best interests.
As matters stand, we know little about the background to the case. In any event, one is left with the impression that the process was not helpful for any of the parties involved – quite the contrary. A more conciliatory approach might have yielded better results.
Given the framing of the issue as presented before the Court, this underlying problem was not on the table. Nonetheless, I did not find it appropriate to simply let it pass without any mention at all.
